                                               Prepared for submission to JCAP




                                               A model to mini-quench early galaxies
                                               by balancing stellar feedback and gas
arXiv:2609.19265v1 [astro-ph.GA] 16 Sep 2026




                                               accretion

                                               Judah Luberto and Steven R. Furlanetto
                                                Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California,
                                                475 Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, USA
                                                E-mail: judah@astro.ucla.edu, sfurlane@astro.ucla.edu

                                               Abstract. The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has discovered a population of low-
                                               mass, early galaxies with very low levels of star formation over tens of Myr. These “mini-
                                               quenched” galaxies were one of the many surprises from JWST and still require a robust
                                               explanation. We seek to explain a few important properties of these galaxies, namely the
                                               timescales governing their star formation and quenching. We use a simple model that pairs
                                               stellar feedback with the forces binding gas to a z ∼ 6 galaxy, and with plausible parameter
                                               choices, this model produces mini-quenching in galaxies approximately as large as observed
                                               mini-quenched galaxies – up to total stellar masses of ∼ 1010 M⊙ . In our model, the ejected
                                               interstellar gas forms into a spherical shell that expands outward during quenching. Our
                                               novel improvement is allowing this expanding shell to prevent accreting gas from falling
                                               in, in contrast to other models whose shells do not interact with accreting gas. Using our
                                               model, if a galaxy accretes isotropically, we find that stellar feedback can reproduce observed
                                               timescales of mini-quenching with plausible galaxy-formation parameter values. However, at
                                               low halo masses, the quenching timescale of our model is too long (> 100 Myr). A potential
                                               solution for a long quenching time is for the galaxy to accrete via filaments, in which case
                                               only a portion of the shell interacts with the accreting gas and the quenching timescale
                                               decreases to more accepted values. However, the ram pressure from feedback cannot stop
                                               filaments with very small opening angles, as occur in some halo formation models, making
                                               mini-quenching impossible. Finally, we use this model to estimate the fraction of galaxies
                                               undergoing mini-quenching, finding that it can be large.

                                               Keywords: high-redshift galaxies, galaxy formation
Contents

1 Introduction                                                             2

2 A model of feedback from a source galaxy                                 3
  2.1 The halo potential well                                              4
  2.2 A simple galaxy growth model                                         4
  2.3 Galaxy radius                                                        5
  2.4 Initial mass function                                                6
  2.5 Stellar lifetimes                                                    7
  2.6 Radiative feedback from stars                                        7
      2.6.1 UV-driven dusty winds                                          7
      2.6.2 Lyα-driven winds                                               8
  2.7 Feedback from supernovae                                             9
  2.8 Gas accretion                                                       10
  2.9 Motion of the outflowing shell                                      11

3 An    estimate for the largest mini-quenched galaxy                     12
  3.1    Which inward forces dominate?                                    12
  3.2    Which outward forces dominate?                                   13
  3.3    The mini-quenching mass limit                                    14
  3.4    Inclusion of filaments in the approximation                      16

4 Reproducing mini-quenching observables with our model                   17
  4.1 Recreating mini-quenching stellar masses and quenching timescales   17
  4.2 Recreating star-formation timescales in mini-quenched galaxies      20
  4.3 Quenching timescales at different redshifts                         20
  4.4 The effects of filamentary accretion                                21
  4.5 Sensitivity to initial conditions                                   23
  4.6 Estimating the fraction of galaxies in mini-quenched phases         23

5 Discussion                                                              25
  5.1 Instabilities in the expanding shell                                25
  5.2 Can AGNs increase mini-quenching?                                   26
  5.3 Escaping winds and metal enrichment                                 27
  5.4 Starbursts following a mini-quenching episode                       27

6 Conclusions                                                             28

A Analytic calculation of the number of supernova in our model            29

B Effect of Compton cooling on the pressure from hot gas                  31




                                        –1–
1       Introduction

Analytic models and simulations predict that when a young galaxy grows during Cosmic
Dawn, it will fluctuate between periods of higher and lower rates of star formation [1–4]. To
gain intuition for why this stochasticity might occur, let us consider a simple argument of
timescales: the star formation timescale is tied to the dynamical timescale, which controls the
speed at which gas can collapse and form dense clouds. These timescales are ∝ (1 + z)−3/2 ,
and at early epochs the star-formation timescale becomes less than or comparable to the
feedback timescales from those stars (a few tens of Myr for supernova). Short star-formation
timescales mean early galaxies could form multiple generations of stars at higher rates before
feedback could prevent further star formation, leading to higher net star formation efficiencies.
The detailed implications of this trend depend on the details of star formation inside galaxies.
With a simple galaxy formation model, [5] found that stochastic star formation could occur in
low mass galaxies (mh ≲ 1011 M⊙ ), while [6] argued that it could occur primarily in massive
galaxies (the “feedback-free” model).
      While some (simple) models of this stochasticity included phases where the accumulated
feedback halted all star formation, these episodes were generally assumed to be oversimplifi-
cations. However, recent observations have found a population of early (z ≳ 3) and low-mass
(m∗,tot < 1010 M⊙ 1 ) galaxies with zero star formation. The constant number densities of
these galaxies across z ∼ 4–6 suggests their star formation is episodic and not permanent
[7, 8] (leading many to call these galaxies “mini-quenched”). This mini-quenching occurs
over a broad range of galaxy masses. For example, across the varied types of observations
(e.g., photometric color cuts [9, 10], photometric fitting [8], spectroscopic observations [11–
14], and spatially-resolved lensed systems [15, 16]), many of these galaxies have stellar masses
up to m∗,tot ∼ 109 –1010 M⊙ , likely corresponding to relatively large halo masses mh ∼ 1011 –
1012 M⊙ . Apparently, we should put effort into understanding how this mini-quenching occurs
and what requirements it places on models.
      The driving mechanism behind this population of mini-quenched galaxies very likely
differs from typical quenched galaxies at lower redshifts. Locally, at around m∗,tot ∼ 1010 M⊙ ,
most galaxies transition from the blue type to the red type [17], suggesting that late quenching
is associated with a mass transition, in contrast to the broad range in which it is seen at
high redshifts. Second, at late times quenching persists over very long timescales (≳ 1–2
Gyr), whereas mini-quenched galaxies do not form stars on the order of a few tens of Myr.
Because the latter is much smaller than the age of the Universe even during the Cosmic
Dawn, mini-quenching appears to be a temporary phenomenon, unlike normal quenching.
      Moreover, the internal and external quenching mechanisms common to local galaxies
are as follows (though our summary is brief and the interested reader should see [18] for
a review). Internally, high-mass galaxies can host active galactic nuclei (AGN). Accretion
onto a central black hole can release enough energy to create massive outflows in high-mass
galaxies [19, 20] or provide enough heating to prevent star formation in these galaxies [21].
Also internally, galaxies could be quenched by their morphological features (e.g., [22]). High-
mass (m∗,tot > 1010 M⊙ ) early galaxies might be quenched by similar processes to local
galaxies [7, 23, 24], as large AGN appear in some early quenched galaxies [25–27], and they
could even affect star formation in the surrounding environment [28]. But signatures of AGN
    1
    Note that we define observed/total stellar mass as m∗,tot instead of the more common m∗ . This is because
we later denote m∗ as the stellar mass produced since the beginning of a single star-formation episode in our
model.




                                                   –2–
are much harder to observe in low-mass galaxies [29–32], even though some low-mass galaxies
do appear to host large black holes (e.g., [33, 34]).
      Additionally, low-redshift galaxies can be quenched by their external environment.
High-mass galaxies tend to live in denser environments, and interactions with the surrounding
environment can cause quenching (e.g., [35, 36]). Massive early galaxies are found in a wide
range of environments [37–39], suggesting that environmental quenching mechanisms could
be present in galaxies in the most dense environments. Some lower-mass mini-quenched
galaxies have been found in overdense environments as well [10, 40, 41], but there is no
compelling evidence for an environmental cause.
      Here we focus on a model in which stellar feedback ultimately causes mini-quenching.
Previous analytic models so far have treated outflowing gas and inflowing gas as operating
independently of each other (e.g., [5, 42, 43]). Even in models which track the location of
a shell of outflowing gas, the shell is typically assumed not to affect accretion (e.g., [44]).
However, as long as the outflowing gas is incident on the inflowing gas, it is possible that
these gases will counteract each others’ motion. Therefore, we create a model in which an
outflowing thin shell prevents gas from accreting onto the galaxy, choking off the supply of
gas for star formation. This approach should be seen in conjunction with previous attempts
to model temporary quenching in early galaxies, either through analytic models (e.g., [6, 45])
or results from simulations (e.g., [46–49]).
      The purpose of this paper is to present a model which can reproduce important observ-
ables of early mini-quenched galaxies using stellar feedback prescriptions. In section 2, we
present our galaxy source model. Within this section, we include an implementation of gas
accretion by filaments and the motion of the gas leaving the galaxy. In section 3, we use
this model to calculate an approximate maximum halo mass that may be mini-quenched.
In section 4, we compare our model to a few key observables of mini-quenched galaxies. In
section 5, we discuss extensions of our model and implications of mini-quenching in general,
and in section 6, we offer the conclusions of our results.
      Unless otherwise specified, throughout this work we use a flat ΛCDM cosmology with
Ωm = 0.3111, ΩΛ = 0.6889, Ωb = 0.0489, h = 0.6766, consistent with the results of [50].


2       A model of feedback from a source galaxy

The purpose of this section is to present our model of mini-quenching in early galaxies, in
which stellar feedback removes gas from a galaxy and prevents further gas from accreting
onto its inner star-forming region.2 The process of quenching a single galaxy in our model is
as follows:

    1. A low-mass, early galaxy has just completed a previous mini-quenched cycle and begins
       to accrete gas onto its inner region. We assume the gas depleted from the previous mini-
       quenching period is recycled back onto the galaxy so that the gas mass is proportional
       to the halo mass: mg = (Ωb /Ωm )mh .

    2. The galaxy forms stars out of the gas in its reservoir. Given that this galaxy was
       previously quenched, only the newly-created stars produce feedback.
    2
    We focus on mechanical effects rather than gas heating (e.g., [45]) because of fast cooling timescales at
early times (scaling as ∝        −3
                        ∼ (1 + z) ).




                                                   –3–
  3. Meanwhile, the galaxy accretes gas, either isotropically or along filaments. The gas
     accretion adds to the gas reservoir and may be used to form stars until the galaxy is
     quenched.

  4. The gas reservoir in the galaxy is pushed outwards by stellar feedback and pulled
     inwards by the halo’s gravitational force and the inward momentum of the accreted
     gas. We model the gas reservoir as a thin shell at the edge of the star-forming region
     to test whether feedback can overcome the inward forces and drive the gas outward.

  5. Once the shell begins to move outward, the galaxy is considered quenched because
     there is no gas inside the galaxy. We label this the star-formation timescale, tSF . The
     galaxy stops forming stars, though feedback continues. The forces on the shell cause
     the shell to move outwards, which we track using a shell motion equation.

  6. As the shell expands, feedback eventually fades (because star formation has stopped),
     but the accreting gas continues to provide inward momentum to the shell. Our model
     assumes that the galaxy remains quenched until the shell falls back onto the galaxy.
     We label this the quenching timescale, tquench .

In the following subsections, we describe the components of this picture in detail.

2.1   The halo potential well
The first step in creating a galaxy is to consider the halo in which the galaxy lives. In the
standard theory of galaxy formation, all galaxies form in dark matter halos. For simplicity,
we describe the halos as isothermal spheres whose mass profile is

                                                2σ 2 r
                                        mh (r) =       ,                                 (2.1)
                                                 G
where σ is the velocity dispersion of the halo. The velocity dispersion is the virial/circular
velocity at the virial radius, rvir :

                                                      Gmh
                                      σ 2 (rvir ) ≈        .                             (2.2)
                                                      rvir
The viral radius is defined as

                                   "            1/2         #2/3
                                        200G             1
                          rvir (z) =          mh
                                        ∆h Ωm         10H(z)
                                                                                         (2.3)
                                               −1          1/3
                                            1+z          mh
                                   ∼ 3kpc                          ,
                                             7         108 M⊙

where ∆h ≡ 200 is the overdensity of a halo and H(z) is the Hubble constant across redshift.

2.2   A simple galaxy growth model
Our model will trace the interaction of feedback with accreting gas, so we require a pre-
scription for the latter. To begin, we initialize our galaxy to have a gas reservoir with mass
mg = (Ωb /Ωm )mh available for star formation. Using the framework and notation from [51],
a dark matter halo which has a mass mh grows approximately at a rate




                                             –4–
                                     ṁh = Amh (1 + z)5/2 ,                                 (2.4)

where A = 0.03/Gyr, which is the average growth rate of halos from [43]. The baryons
accrete at a rate (Ωb /Ωm )ṁh , so the gas reservoir grows as

                                              Ωb
                                      ṁg =      ṁh − ṁ∗ ,                                (2.5)
                                              Ωm

where ṁ∗ is the instantaneous star-formation rate in the galaxy. The gas enters the galaxy
with an inflow velocity equal to the virial velocity of the halo, σ, as supported by simulations
[52, 53].
       We parameterize the star-formation rate by a star-formation efficiency (SFE) per free-
fall time, f∗ , such that

                                                 f∗
                                         ṁ∗ =       mg ,                                   (2.6)
                                                 tff
where tff is the free-fall time of the gas within the region of star formation. For consistency
with previous results (e.g., [3, 5]), we use the free-fall time of a disk galaxy. We follow the
scaling relations from [3] for the free-fall time, which calculates it at the half-mass radius of
a disk inside a NFW halo (e.g., [54]). The free-fall time is tff ≈ 0.2torb ≈ 0.0026/H(z), where
torb is the orbital frequency of the disk.
      As for the SFE, the value of f∗ for individual galaxies is unknown in (early) galaxy for-
mation, though there is an approximate expected range of f∗ ∼ [0.001, 0.1] that is commonly
used (e.g., [5]), with f∗ = 0.015 being the standard local theoretical value [55, 56]. Note that
the instantaneous SFE is different than the time-averaged SFE, f˜∗ = m∗,tot /mg , which is the
ratio of the total mass of stars (including stars formed before the initialization of our model;
an observed quantity) and the gas mass.
      We also require the dust mass, mD , in our model. We assume, again for simplicity, that
D/D⊙ = Z/Z⊙ , where D = mD /mg , D⊙ = 1/162, and Z is the metallicity in the galaxy.
Our fiducial value for the metallicity is Z/Z⊙ = 10−4 , which is representative of extremely
pristine gas (often associated with Population III star formation), though we will find in
section 3.2 that the forces directly associated with metallicity are subdominant (a metallicity
of Z/Z⊙ = 0.1 changes our results by ∼ 1%).

2.3   Galaxy radius
We parameterize the radius of the galaxy as R0 (t) = κrvir (t). If a galaxy has a rotationally-
supported disk, the edge of the star-forming region would have κ ≈ 0.035, the typical spin
parameter of the disk [57]. This is the smallest extent our galaxies can have.
      Early galaxies can form stars in a much larger region because they may have not formed
well-defined disks at this point (e.g., [58]). [59] created a framework of star formation in a
turbulent circumgalactic medium and found that stars can form out to κ ∼ 0.4–0.5, though
at much smaller rates than will be formed at smaller radii. We approximate the numbers of
stars forming at κ > 0.4 as zero and set a maximum extent of κ = 0.4.
      Throughout the paper, we will use κ = 0.035 as a fiducial choice. We will find that for
isotropic accretion our choice of κ does not affect the results, although in section 3.4 we will
see that it can affect the results when filamentary accretion is included.




                                              –5–
                  101
                               Chab




                                                                     SN limit = 8 M
                                   rier I
                  100                    MF


            10−1
      Φ ≡ dN/dm




                                   α mchar [M ]
            10−2
                                 1.35       0.2
            10−3                 1.35       5
                                 1.35       10
                                 2.35       0.2
            10−4                 2.35       5
                                 2.35       10
            10−5
                        10−1                      100                    101                 102
                                                        mstar [M ]

Figure 1. Initial mass functions for a variety of parameter values in equation 2.7, all with β = 1.6.
We plot the Chabrier IMF as a solid black line and find it is similar to the parameter combination
α = 1.35, mchar = 0.2M⊙ , which we define as “Chabrier-like” for the remainder of the paper. This
IMF is our fiducial choice. However, there exist more top-heavy IMFs with a larger fraction of massive
stars – an important aspect to our model. To gain intuition for the number of supernovae each IMF
produces, we plot the minimum mass supernovae can occur at, mstar = 8M⊙ , as a vertical gray line.
We find that the parameter choice α = 2.35, mchar = 5M⊙ serves to maximize the number of stars in
this range (at least for the IMFs plotted).


2.4    Initial mass function
One of the more important assumptions in our model is the distribution of masses of stars
in the galaxy. Because we focus on mini-quenching at early times, we allow our stellar
population to follow a more “top-heavy” initial mass function (IMF), which is one whose
stars exist at higher masses on average, perhaps motivated by its lower metallicity. Given
the lack of constraints on the IMF at early times [60], we choose to follow the flexible IMF
functional form in [61], which expresses the number of stars per unit stellar mass as
                                                         "          #
                                   dN       M⊙ −α            mchar β
                      Φ(mstar ) =        =     m     exp −               ,               (2.7)
                                  dmstar    A1 star           mstar
                                                     R
where A1 is a normalization constant (defined by mstar Φdmstar = 1M⊙ ). We allow stars
to form in a mass range mstar = 0.08–100M⊙ . We choose β = 1.6 throughout the paper
(aligning with, e.g., [61–63]). The parameter β represents the IMF shape at mstar < mchar ,
which is of lesser importance in our model.
      To highlight the flexibility of this functional form, we show in figure 1 how it can
approximate the well-known Chabrier IMF [64] (solid black line). The dashed purple line
uses the functional form of equation 2.7 with α = 2.35, β = 1.6, and mchar = 0.2M⊙ . We
call this set of parameter values a “Chabrier-like” IMF for the rest of the paper.
      The IMF form in equation 2.7 is also flexible enough to create more top-heavy (or
bottom-heavy) distributions than the Chabrier IMF. We visualize this effect in figure 1 for




                                                        –6–
a number of α and mchar parameter combinations. Focusing first on the characteristic mass,
we see that increasing the mchar value from the Chabrier-like value of 0.2M⊙ to 5M⊙ (dashed
blue line), the IMF distribution shifts quickly toward higher masses.
      For our model, the key implication of the IMF is how it affects the amount of stellar
feedback, which is driven by massive stars. We might expect a more top-heavy IMF to always
produce more feedback. However, more feedback in a stellar population is not a simple
mapping to larger mchar values: because the average stellar mass increases with mchar , the
number of stars decreases. It is possible to increase the average mass too much, such that the
fraction of stars with masses > 8M⊙ increases, but the total number of supernovae decreases.
To understand this complex interplay of parameters, we draw a vertical gray line denoting
8M⊙ in figure 1 (the minimum stellar mass which can go supernova). Because the IMF drops
dramatically at higher star masses, the important quantity to focus on is the value of the
IMF at and around 8M⊙ . Most of the supernovae will occur in this range. For α = 1.35,
we find that increasing mchar from 0.2M⊙ to 10M⊙ actually decreases the number of stars
above > 8M⊙ .
      Of the IMF parameter sets shown, [α = 2.35, mchar = 5M⊙ ] has the highest fraction of
stars that will go supernova. For the rest of this paper, we will refer to this parameter set
as our “top-heavy” IMF and use it to show how an IMF more top heavy than the Chabrier
IMF will affect the mini-quenching process.

2.5     Stellar lifetimes
Because mini-quenching is a time-dependent process, we next need to determine the timescales
over which newly-formed stars will drive feedback. We approximate the lifetime of a star as
equal to its time on the main sequence. We follow the lead of [4], who for simplicity find the
stellar lifetimes using a mass-to-light scaling of Population I stars:
                                                               −2/5
                                                        t
                               mstar (t) =                              M⊙ ,             (2.8)
                                                     1010 yrs
which also produces produces similar lifetimes as low-metallicity, Population III populations
(e.g., [65, 66]). Because the smallest star in our model to go supernova is 8M⊙ , we define
the lifetime of that star to be tSN = 55 Myr.

2.6     Radiative feedback from stars
We next need to determine how feedback from the galaxy’s stars drives gas outward (which
we model as the force on a thin shell). To begin, we estimate the force produced on a shell
from radiation pressure. Throughout this section, we refer the interested reader to [67] for a
review.

2.6.1    UV-driven dusty winds
One effective source of radiation pressure is the UV emission of massive, hot stars: if the
photons are absorbed by dust, and if the dust and the gas are dynamically coupled, the UV
photons impart an outward momentum on the gas. We thus begin with the UV luminosity
per stellar mass of a population of age t′ :
                                          R x(t′ )
                                           0.08M⊙ Φ(m)L∗,UV (m)dm
                            lUV (t′ ) =       R 100M⊙             ,                      (2.9)
                                               0.08M⊙ mΦ(m)dm




                                                     –7–
where x(t′ ) is mass of a star with a lifetime t′ (the maximum star mass still alive after time
t′ ), L∗,UV (m) = 4π 2 R∗2 (m)BUV (m) is the UV luminosity of a single star with mass m, R∗
is the radius of a star of a given mass, and BUV (m) is the Planck function. To convert
from stellar mass to temperature, we assume a simple relation of Teff = 5772K(m/M⊙ )5/8 ,
which matches observations of the solar neighborhood [68] within 10% for stellar masses ∼ 1–
20M⊙ . The range of relevant UV wavelengths depends on the composition of dust in our
galaxies. For example, if early galaxies contain more small dust grains than local galaxies
because their dust is created primarily by supernova [69], only the shorter UV wavelengths
would be absorbed by dust. But it will turn out that the force from UV-driven winds is
sub-dominant even with the full UV wavelength range (100–4000Å), so we choose to use the
entire range for simplicity. With these choices, our model produces about half the number
of hydrogen-ionizing photons as a similar prescription with starburst99 [70]; the main
difference is our choice of a Chabrier-like IMF. Our simple top-heavy IMF produces ∼ 20%
more ionizing photons than starburst99. The details of the stellar modeling thus affect
our results modestly, with a comparable effect to the IMF choice.
       Now, the total luminosity for a galaxy at time t is
                                          Z     t
                              LUV (t) =             ṁ∗ (t′ )lUV (t − t′ )dt′ .         (2.10)
                                            0

Finally, assuming that gas and dust are dynamically coupled, the UV-luminosity force on the
shell is

                                                                     LUV
                                FUV = (1 − e−τUV + τIR )                 ,              (2.11)
                                                                      c
where τIR,UV = κIR,UV mD /(4πr2 ) is the optical depth of infrared (IR) and UV light, respec-
tively. Here, the IR factor accounts for photons re-emitted by the absorbing dust, which
can then scatter again and increase the outward force. For the values of κIR,UV , we follow
[71]: the opacity of dust to UV radiation is κUV = 103 cm2 /g and the opacity of dust to IR
radiation is κIR = 100.7 cm2 /g, which is approximately the Rosseland-mean dust opacity over
shell temperatures T ∼ 100–1000K.

2.6.2   Lyα-driven winds
Early galaxies have less dust and their gas reservoirs are denser, creating conditions where
Lyα radiation pressure can be the dominant force from stellar winds. After an ionizing
photon is absorbed by the wind, Lyα photons can scatter multiple times within the shell,
imparting momentum at each scatter (see [72] for an in-depth calculation of the physics of
this process).
      Similar to the results from [72], the Lyα luminosity per stellar mass formed of age t′ is

                          lLyα (t′ ) = (1 − fesc,LyC )frec,Lyα Q̇LyC ELyα ,             (2.12)

where fesc,LyC is the escape fraction of Lyman continuum photons (chosen to be fesc,LyC =
0.1), frec,Lyα is the fraction of recombinations that produce a Lyα photon (chosen to be
frec,Lyα = 2/3), Q̇LyC is the rate of production of Lyman continuum photons per solar mass
(calculated in the same manner as L∗,UV , but adapted for this quantity), and ELyα is the
energy of a Lyα photon. The total Lyα luminosity is




                                                    –8–
                                           Z   t
                              LLyα (t) =           ṁ∗ (t′ )lLyα (t − t′ )dt′ .          (2.13)
                                           0
       The Lyα force is a function of the Lyα “force multiplier,” MF , which reflects the ad-
ditional force generated by multiple scatterings of each Lyα photon and depends on the
hydrogen column density, the dust to gas ratio, and the temperature of the shell (see [72]).
We approximate the temperature of the shell by assuming half of the dust-driven and Lyα
luminosity is deposited as thermal energy and that the gas is cooled by the cooling functions
from [73], assuming solar abundance, to a minimum temperature of 104 K, below which the
cooling times become very long. Our choice of a cooling function derived for higher metal-
licities predicts faster cooling than the expected lower metallicity population, which results
in larger MF values, and therefore more force from Lyα photons. Even with these large MF
values, we will find the Lyα forces to be subdominant. With these results in mind, the force
from Lyα-driven winds is

                                                           LLyα
                                       FLyα = MF                .                        (2.14)
                                                            c
2.7   Feedback from supernovae
Because supernovae suddenly release an enormous amount of energy into the surrounding
medium, we treat their feedback differently than the momentum injection from stellar radi-
ation in our model. More specifically, we imagine that supernovae build up a region of hot
gas that exerts an outward pressure force against a surrounding (thin) shell [44, 74, 75].
     The rate of supernovae at a time t is equal to the rate at which stars above the threshold
mass 8 M⊙ are dying. Given our approximation for the stellar lifetimes in equation 2.8, this
can be written as

                                      ṁ⋆ (t′ )
                                  Z t                             
                                                            dmstar
                       ṄSN (t) =                 Φ(mstar )     ′
                                                                          dt′ ,          (2.15)
                                   0   M   ⊙                 dt      t−t′

where the term in square brackets is to be evaluated at the stellar mass whose lifetime is equal
to the time interval between the time of a star’s formation (t′ ) and the time at which the
supernova rate is evaluated (t). In appendix A, we analytically calculate ṄSN as a function
of f∗ , mh , and time of star formation.
       Supernovae force the gas shell outwards by supplying energy to the hot gas interior to
the shell. Following [74], we compute the pressure pushing on the shell via

                                           Lp       v
                                      Ṗ =    3
                                                − 5P ,                                (2.16)
                                          2πr       r
where Lp is the rate of change in energy of the hot gas and v is the velocity of the shell;
the last term accounts for the energy loss from P dV work. The supernovae supply energy,
but the hot gas also cools (primarily) by Compton cooling (see [44] for a discussion on the
different forms of cooling):

                                                         2πr3 P
                                      Lcomp = −                 ,                        (2.17)
                                                          tcomp
where tcomp = 1.2 × 108 yr[(1 + z)/10]−4 is the Compton cooling time. The total luminosity
from the hot gas is then Lp = LSN + Lcomp , with LSN = ϵk ṄSN × 1051 erg. Here, ϵk is the




                                                   –9–
fraction of supernova energy released into the wind. We set ϵk = 1, though we comment
on how a change in ϵk will change our results in a later section. Finally, the force from
supernovae on a shell at radius r is

                                         FP = 4πr2 P.                                     (2.18)

2.8   Gas accretion
The key question for mini-quenching is whether this feedback can halt accretion, choking off
the galaxy’s gas supply. We now consider how the gas accretes onto the galaxy.
       In simple models of early galaxy formation, accretion is often assumed to be isotropic.
However, there is support for filamentary accretion at these times: [76] used the Colossus
code [77, 78] to estimate which halos should be fed by filaments as a function of redshift. Using
a crude estimate that all halos above a 2σ overdensity at any redshift will be fed by filamentary
structures, the model estimated that all z = 6 halos above a mass mh ≳ 3 × 109 M⊙ will be
stream fed. According to this argument, most observed early galaxies are fed by filaments
of some kind. However, the rapid growth of the nonlinear mass scale makes this expectation
highly redshift dependent: at z ∼ 3, their threshold corresponds to mh ≳ 3 × 1011 M⊙ . While
the exact relation between galaxies being fed by streams and their mass/redshift is unknown,
it is clear that special attention should be made to the possibility that observed mini-quenched
galaxies are supplied cold gas via filaments. We therefore consider both models in which
accretion occurs isotropically and those in which accretion occurs along narrow filaments.
       In the latter case, we assume gas filaments subsist down to the star-forming region
of the galaxy and are conical, such that the radius of the filament scales linearly with the
distance from the center of the galaxy (the same as, e.g., [76]). This assumption is supported
by simulations which resolve gas filament accretion in galaxies (e.g., [52, 79]). [80] found
that the radius of gas filaments are a few tens of percent of the virial radius (at the virial
radius) for a Milky Way-like progenitor across cosmic time. However, for a broader range
of halos and filament properties supported by simulations (e.g., [81]), [76] estimated that at
Cosmic Dawn, roughly, the filament radius is ∼ 0.08rvir when evaluated at the virial radius
(corresponding to a covering fraction of only ∼ 0.005). They performed this calculation using
an analytic model which assumed cold gas streams are supported by rotation (as they found
cold streams supported by zero rotation are inconsistent with cosmological simulations and
observations).
       As long as gas filaments are conical, the solid angle of a gas stream as observed from
the central galaxy is constant with radius:
                                                                    
                                                      2       rfil
                                    θfil = π arctan                      .                (2.19)
                                                              rvir
With this value in mind, the total covering fraction is

                                                   Nfil θfil
                                        fcover =             ,                            (2.20)
                                                    4π
where Nfil is the number of filaments and θfil is the solid angle covered by each filament,
assuming each filament is the same size. Many cosmological simulations find that galaxies
which accrete by filaments do so with one large, primary stream that makes up ∼ 50% of
the accretion rate, and two smaller streams which make up the rest of the accretion rate




                                             – 10 –
                       10               tquench ∼ 175 Myr


                        8
                r/R0
                        6




                                                                mh =
                                                                  10 M
                        4




                                                                    8
                                tquench ∼ 75 Myr

                        2
                                                    mh = 109M
                        0          50          100      150               200
                                                t [Myr]

Figure 2. Shell paths of two example galaxies as a function of time, t. Each are run with f∗ = 0.001,
a Chabrier-like IMF, and fcover = 1, and both have star-formation times a few tens of Myr. To display
the distance reached by each example, we plot the shell radius, r(t), scaled by the minimum radius,
R0 (t), on the y-axis. The mh = 108 M⊙ halo (blue line) reaches a much further scaled radius than the
mh = 109 M⊙ halo (red line). As a consequence, the lower-mass halo is mini-quenched for a longer
period than the higher-mass halo. We illustrate this longer quenching timescale with the brackets
above each shell path: the galaxy begins quenching when r/R0 > 1 and concludes its quenching
period when the shell path returns to r/R0 = 1. Here, the lower-mass halo is quenched for ∼ 2.5×
longer than the higher-mass example.


(e.g., [81]), but our model ignores these differences. Therefore, we assume Nfil = 3 identical
streams for our filamentary model (similar to [76]).

2.9   Motion of the outflowing shell
To initialize the system, we assume that the galaxy’s gas reservoir is in a thin shell at R0 , the
effective radius of the star-forming region (see section 2.3). However, for our purposes we only
need follow the portion of the shell that is incident on the accreting gas, because it determines
what actually prevents the gas from accreting. This has an initial mass msh,f = fcover mg . If
the shell is outflowing, it gains mass as ṁsh,f = (Ωb /Ωm )ṁh . Otherwise, the accreting gas
gathers into the gas reservoir of the galaxy.
      The motion of the outflowing gas shell (incident on the accreting gas) is described via a
force equation. Similar equations have been discussed before, both for radiation pressure on
dusty shells [71, 82–84] and supernova-induced pressure [44, 74, 75]. However, our equation
below includes the impact of filaments with the covering fraction of accreting gas:

                   dv     Gmh msh,f
             msh,f    =−             − ṁsh,f (vfil + v) + (FUV + FLyα + Fp )fcover .   (2.21)
                   dt          r2
where vfil = σ is the inward velocity of the accreting gas, which is set to be always positive.
The behavior of the shell is that when v is positive, the shell moves outwards and the galaxy
is considered quenched. In the equation above, the forces FUV , FLyα , and Fp all scale with




                                               – 11 –
fcover because it is the fraction of the total force from the galaxy that is incident on the
portion of the shell pushing against accretion.
      We have assumed the gas reservoir is a thin shell at R0 . Realistically, the gas reservoir
will take time to evolve from its diffuse state in a galaxy into a thin shell outside the galaxy’s
star forming region, but this provides a minimal criterion for an outflow and is reasonable
given that low-mass galaxies appear to quench in a few Myr [85]. Our parameter ϵk can
account for the supernova energy lost in driving the gas from its initial configuration into
a shell. We also note that we do not allow the shell to sink to smaller radii to prevent the
unphysical result that r → 0 when v < 0.
      Figure 2 demonstrates the paths of shells for two example galaxies, both of which form
stars with f∗ = 0.001 (and fcover = 1). The span between the beginning of shell motion and
the end is the quenching timescale, tquench . We write above curly brackets the approximate
quenching timescales of each model halo as a visualization of the process.

3     An estimate for the largest mini-quenched galaxy

In this section, we derive a simple criterion for the limiting halo mass that can undergo mini-
quenching by determining the conditions under which outward feedback forces overcome
the binding forces of gravity and gas accretion. We explicitly perform this calculation for
galaxies at z ∼ 6, as some of the relevant processes have complex redshift dependence. We
show results for other redshifts as well. In later sections, we will see that this simplified
estimate of the maximum halo mass matches the results of our full model rather well.

3.1    Which inward forces dominate?
To begin, we consider the two inward forces (gravity and accretion) and determine which is
more significant. The force of gravity from an isothermal halo on a shell is

                              2Gmh msh fcover
             Fg,max (R0 ) =
                                 R0 rvir
                                                             4/3                                  (3.1)
                                      32               mh                κ −1        fcover
                         = 4.2 × 10 erg/cm                                                         ,
                                                     108 M⊙            0.035            1
where we have assumed the mass of the shell is equal to the baryonic mass in an average
galaxy, msh ∼ (Ωb /Ωm )mh . The gravitational force depends on the halo mass, which increases
throughout the period of star formation; according to equation 2.4, it will grow by a factor
ξ = exp[A(1 + z)5/2 tSF ] . At z = 6, this factor can reach ≈ 1.5 for tSF = 100 Myr, so we take
ξ = 1.25 as a representative value and increase the effective gravitational force by a factor
1.254/3 following the above mass scaling.
     The second inward force is that from gas accreting onto the galaxy, for which


                              Facc = vacc ṁg
                                   ∼ vvir ṁh (Ωb /Ωm )
                                                                      4/3                            (3.2)
                                                                mh
                                   = 2.9 × 1031 erg/cm                        ,
                                                              108 M⊙

where we have also multiplied the prefactor by ξ 4/3 . The ratio of these two forces is




                                                – 12 –
                                        mh = 108 M                                           mh = 1012 M
                        1.0
                                                                FSN
                                                                FLyα
                        0.8
F/(FSN + FLyα + FUV )




                                                                FUV

                        0.6
                                                                                                        Chabrier-like IMF
                                                                                                        “Top-Heavy” IMF
                        0.4


                        0.2


                        0.0
                           0       10     20      30       40          50   0   10               20      30      40         50
                                           tSF [Myr]                                              tSF [Myr]

Figure 3. Fraction of the outward feedback force provided by each feedback source in our model at
z = 6. We plot this value for two halo masses as a function of the length of time of star formation, tSF ,
and for our two representative IMFs: a Chabrier-like IMF (solid lines) and a “top-heavy” IMF which
maximizes the number supernova occurring per unit star formation. In each IMF case, the number
of supernovae increases with time (after short timescales, only the rare, extremely-massive stars have
gone supernova, while at later times, the more numerous “lower” mass stars die). The top-heavy
IMF decreases the fraction of force that supernova produce because radiation pressure increases more
dramatically than the force from supernova across these IMF ranges.



                                                                     κ −1                 
                                                       Fg,max                       fcover
                                              f1 =            = 9.3                              ,                     (3.3)
                                                        Facc         0.035            1
which means that the force of gravity is dominant if κ < 0.32 (and fcover = 1). Because the
maximum extent of our disk is κ ≲ 0.4, we assume below that the force of gravity exceeds
the accretion force (for isotropic systems, although section 3.4 shows that this may not be
true for filamentary accretion).

3.2                           Which outward forces dominate?
While it has been found that the Lyα force is the dominant feedback force in the context
of radiation pressure on low-metallicity gas [67, 72], in our model, supernova pressure is
dominant on the scales of the galaxy star-forming region.
     In figure 3, we plot the fraction that each feedback mechanism contributes to the total
outward force of two example galaxies. The ratio of each feedback force to the total force
does not depend on f∗ because each force scales linearly with the SFE. However, the ratio
does depend on how long each of these galaxies form stars, as shown on the x-axis. For a
very low-mass galaxy (left panel), the galaxy is dominated by supernova pressure after a few
Myr of star formation. However, for a larger halo (right panel), the Lyα force can be strong
up to ∼ 10 Myr. This result suggests that stellar winds might be useful in creating the shell
and causing mini-quenching on timescales of a few Myr (similar to the results of [45]), but
supernovae are required to maintain quenching for longer timescales.




                                                                  – 13 –
      To find an analytic expression for the force from supernovae, we assume Compton
cooling is subdominant, which (if f∗ ∼ 0.01) agrees with our full equations within ∼ 10%
(see appendix B). Then, equation 2.16 becomes Pmax = NSN (tSF )ESN /2πR03 , where NSN (tSF )
is the number of supernovae after a period of star formation. With an expression for NSN (tSF )
from appendix A, the maximum pressure force from supernova is
                                                                        
                                          −8              3        f∗           κ −3
                       Pmax = 7.7 × 10 erg/cm                                                                (3.4)
                                                                  0.01        0.035
                              (
                               (tSF /tSN )1.54                      if tSF ≤ tSN
                            ×                                                                                (3.5)
                               (tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1               if tSF > tSN .
where tchar = 36 Myr and tSN = 55 Myr. As with the inward forces, this expression depends
on the halo mass, which will evolve through the star formation episode. The pressure force
scales as ∝ NSN /rvir . For NSN , we have used equation A.8, which depends on mass. However,
it suffices to use the initial halo mass because most of the supernova progenitors launching
the wind must have formed in the early phases. Note that the virial radius scales as ∝ ξ 1/3 ,
so we have included a factor ≈ 1.25−1/3 . Now, relating the pressure of the hot gas to a force
on the shell, the maximum force from the supernovae is

                                                                                  2/3             
                              34               f∗           κ −1              mh              fcover
           Fp,max = 9.7 × 10 erg/cm                                                                          (3.6)
                                              0.01        0.035              108 M⊙              1
                    (
                     (tSF /tSN )1.54               if tSF ≤ tSN
                  ×                                                                                          (3.7)
                     (tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1        if tSF > tSN .

3.3   The mini-quenching mass limit
                                                                                           2/3                4/3
We expect there to be a maximum halo mass in our model because Fp ∝ mh and Fg ∝ mh .
To calculate this maximum halo mass, we begin by taking the ratio of the inward and outward
forces:

                                                     −2/3
                       Fp,max           f∗         mh
                              = 270                                                                          (3.8)
                        Fg             0.01      108 M⊙
                                (
                                 (tSF /tSN )1.54         if tSF ≤ tSN
                              ×                                                                              (3.9)
                                 (tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1 if tSF > tSN .
Quenching can no longer occur when the inward forces are greater than the outward forces
on the shell which occurs at a maximum halo mass:

                                              NSN 3/5
                                                   
                                      8
                     mh,max = 5 × 10 M⊙                                                                     (3.10)
                                              1000
                                                   f∗ 3/2
                                                      
                                       11
                            = 4.4 × 10 M⊙                                                                   (3.11)
                                                  0.01
                              (
                                           2.31
                                (tSF /tSN )     ,                         if tSF ≤ tSN
                            ×                                                                               (3.12)
                                [(tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1]3/2 ,             if tSF > tSN .




                                                – 14 –
              1013
                     z=3                                                  z=6


              1012
mh,max [M ]




              1011
                                                Chabrier-like IMF
                                                “Top-Heavy” IMF                                     Analytic Result
              1010   20    40           60     80                   100       20        40         60      80         100
                                  tSF [Myr]                                                  tSF [Myr]
                                    1013
                                           z=9


                                              1012
                                mh,max [M ]




                                              1011



                                              1010   20      40         60         80        100
                                                                  tSF [Myr]

Figure 4. Maximum halo mass of mini-quenched galaxies when we simplify our model to include
only the gravitational force and feedback by supernova. Stars are formed with an efficiency f∗ = 0.01.
The star-formation timescale, tSF , is on the x-axis. We plot the result of our analytic calculation
(equation 3.12), which is performed for z = 6 galaxies forming stars in a Chabrier-like IMF. The
analytic calculation does not implement halo growth in a robust way, so plotting this curve is meant
to explore how including halo growth in mh,max (solid lines) will differ from assuming constant halo
mass.


One interesting result is that as long as the force of gravity is the dominant binding force
(κ ≲ 0.4 at z = 6), the maximum halo mass is not a function of the extent of the star forming
region. This is not an obvious result because a more extended galaxy exists on average in
a lower gravitational potential, so its gas should be easier to kick from the system. But at
the same time, a larger extent of gas increases the volume that supernova must heat up to
achieve a similar pressure. These two effects cancel one another in the parameter range we
consider, and mh,max does not depend on κ.
     A second (unsurprising) result is that this maximum halo mass value depends sensitively
on the length of star formation. In short bursts of star formation, doubling the length of star
formation allows for mini-quenching in halos five times larger!
     In figure 4, we show how some key parameters affect mh,max in this two-force model.




                                                               – 15 –
Here, we no longer rely on scaling relations for the virial radius (equation 2.3) or the number
of supernovae (equation A.8), but solve these values numerically. In each panel of the figure,
we display the maximum halo mass for f∗ = 0.01 as a function of the star-formation timescale
for several redshifts in which mini-quenched galaxies are observed. We plot the Chabrier-like
IMF results as red lines and the representative “top-heavy” IMF as blue lines. While we
would expect that a more top-heavy IMF would be more rare at z = 3 than, for example,
z = 9, we plot these results in all panels for completeness.
      We compare the numerical estimate to the analytic result in the z = 6 panel, where
we show the latter with the black dotted line. Note the agreement at tSF ∼ 55 Myr, which
occurs because of our choice of the ξ parameter; the estimate departs from the numerical
results at larger times.
      To convert a maximum halo mass to a maximum stellar mass value, we assume that
mb = (Ωb /Ωm )mh and scale the baryon mass to a stellar mass by a time-averaged star
formation efficiency f˜∗ = m∗,tot /mb . With these conversions, we find

                                                          3/2         !
                                                                 f˜∗
                                               
                                         9          f∗
                   m∗,tot,max = 6.9 × 10 M⊙                                             (3.13)
                                                   0.01          0.1
                                (
                                 (tSF /tSN )2.31 ,                 if tSF ≤ tSN
                              ×                                                         (3.14)
                                 [(tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1]3/2 ,     if tSF > tSN .

This implies that, with isotropic accretion and typical feedback parameters, it is reasonable
to expect mini-quenching in moderately large galaxies. For very efficient star formation,
mini-quenching could extend to much higher masses.

3.4   Inclusion of filaments in the approximation
Naively, we might not expect the inclusion of filaments to have significant implications on
the maximum halo mass for quenching given the results in section 3.3. In that section,
we found that the inward force is often dominated by gravity, while the outward force is
dominated by supernova pressure. Both of these scale with fcover and therefore cancel in our
maximum mass equation. However, our approximations actually break down in the regime
where fcover ≲ 0.1. The inclusion of an fcover factor in the force of gravity makes that force
subdominant in many cases. When the accretion force is the dominant binding force, the
maximum halo mass equation becomes


                                                 f∗ 3/2  κ −3/2 fcover 3/2
                                                                            
               mh,max,fil = 1.9 × 1010 M⊙                                               (3.15)
                                                0.01       0.035          0.01
                            (
                              (tSF /tSN )2.31 ,              if tSF ≤ tSN
                          ×                            3/2
                                                                                        (3.16)
                              [(tSF − tSN )/tchar + 1] , if tSF > tSN ,

which is significantly smaller than the isotropic case. Interestingly, because the force of
gravity is subdominant in this form of the model, the equation is now dependent on the
initial radius of the shell. If the star-forming region of the galaxies are larger than our
fiducial κ = 0.035 value by 10×, then the maximum halo mass value decreases by 30×. This
result suggests that if filaments are present, then the star-forming region must be compact
for mini-quenching to be effective.




                                             – 16 –
4     Reproducing mini-quenching observables with our model

In this section, we expand our model to compare our results more rigorously with observations
of mini-quenched galaxies and explore their implications for high-z galaxy populations. For
a fiducial model, we will assume a Chabrier-like IMF, f∗ = 0.01, fcover = 1, κ = 0.035, and
set the maximum star formation time to tSF = 100 Myr.
       There are three observable results we wish to reproduce with our model: the stel-
lar masses of mini-quenched galaxies (m∗,total ), the quenching timescales (tquench ), and the
amount of time mini-quenched galaxies were forming stars before they became mini-quenched
(tSF ). Unfortunately, matching our model to stellar mass estimates is not a straightforward
task, because there is not a single definition of “mini-quenched.” All of these quantities must
also be extracted via SED fitting, so many have substantial uncertainties. Different authors
apply the mini-quenching term to different populations [7, 14, 49]; we therefore consider a
broad mass range of m∗,total = 107 –1010 M⊙ . The quenching timescale is similarly uncertain,
if it is reported at all, though it is often found to be tquench ∼ 10–25 Myr. The timescale
is unlikely to be many times larger than this, or galaxies with longer quenching timescales
would have been observed (though their rapid fading in the rest-UV does make this challeng-
ing). We therefore expect quenching for ≲ 40 Myr to be a reasonable target. We illustrate
this expected range of values with the light green regions in the right column of figure 5.
       We note that our model has several free parameters, while the observations of mini-
quenched galaxies are so far limited to just a few examples. Thus our goal is not to develop a
detailed set of constraints on the process but rather to examine the qualitative requirements
set by mini-quenching in the context of our wind model.

4.1    Recreating mini-quenching stellar masses and quenching timescales
In figure 5, we show how our model compares to observations of mini-quenched galaxies at
z = 6. In the top left panel, we plot the predicted quenching timescales for our model galaxies
as a function of halo mass for several different SFEs. For reference, we plot the results of
our equation 3.12 prediction as vertical dotted lines for each SFE value. Then, to convert
these results to stellar mass, we scale the halo masses by m∗,total ∼ f˜∗ (Ωb /Ωm )mh , where
f˜∗ is the ratio of stellar mass to baryon mass. We plot each curve (except f∗ = 0.1) with
a range of f˜∗ = [0.01, 0.1], which matches the range of typical values in models [51, 77, 86]
and observations [87]. In the top right panel, we find that our f∗ = 0.01 curve can reproduce
mini-quenching in nearly the entire range of masses and quenching timescales for our galaxies.
In the same panel, we plot two example mini-quenched galaxies at z ∼ 6. The first is JADES-
GS-z7-01-QU [13], whose stellar mass and quenching timescale values we quote from their
fitting with bagpipes [88]. (Note, however, that this galaxy is at z = 7.3; see figure 7 for
the effect of redshift in our model). The second is MACS0417-z5BBG [12], where we follow
their quoted uncertainties. Our model can easily halt star formation in these galaxies for the
required intervals, even at their relatively high stellar masses, indicating that kinetic feedback
can be more effective than thermal injection [45].
       These results suggest that mini-quenching in small galaxies (including those highlighted
in the figure) is relatively easy to achieve, as long as the star formation efficiency is not too
small, although more massive systems that have been discussed are much more difficult to
explain (the green box in the figure). However, we note that, so long as supernova feedback
is dominant, the star formation efficiency and the wind efficiency (ϵk ) are degenerate. We
assume here (optimistically) that ϵk = 1, so that all of the supernova energy is available




                                             – 17 –
                200

                175

                150
                       f∗ =




                                    f∗ =




                                                           Analytic Result
tquench [Myr]




                125
                         0.00




                                      0.01


                                             f∗
                          1




                                              =
                100

                 75                                0 .1

                 50

                 25

                   8            9      10     11          12                    13        7       8       9      10       11
                200
                                                    mchar = 0.2M                                         Approx. Mass Range
                175                                 mchar = 1M                                           MACS0417-z5BBG
                                                    mchar = 5M                                           JADES-GS-z7-01-QU
                150
tquench [Myr]




                125

                100

                 75

                 50

                 25

                  8             9      10     11          12                    13        7       8       9      10       11
                                      log mh [M ]                                     log m∗,total ∼ log{f˜∗(Ωb/Ωm)mh [M ]}

Figure 5.       Quenching timescales at z = 6 in our model. The left columns display tquench as
a function of halo mass, whereas the right columns convert to an approximate total stellar mass,
m∗,total to compare with observations. (Top row:) Our fiducial model, with a Chabrier-like IMF and
a maximum tSF = 100 Myr, for several choices of f∗ . The vertical dotted lines show the result from
equation 3.12 for each f∗ value (with the same colors). In the top-right panel, we convert the f∗ = 0.001
and f∗ = 0.01 curves to stellar mass by assuming a net SFE in the range f˜∗ = [0.01, 0.1]. The green
square denotes the approximate mass range of observed mini-quenched galaxies (see section 4), and
the two stars correspond to the two example mini-quenched galaxies [12, 13] discussed in section 4.1.
(Bottom rows:) Here we fix the SFE at f∗ = 0.01 but change the IMF (as described in section 2.4).
We keep β = 1.6 and α = −2.35 constant, but we increase mchar from the fiducial mchar = 0.2M⊙
(purple line) to mchar = 5M⊙ . In the bottom right panel, we only plot the increased mchar values for
readability.




                                                                             – 18 –
                                                               MACS0417-z5BBG
                                   2                           JADES-GS-z7-01-QU
                              10
                                                               f∗ = 0.001
                                                               f∗ = 0.01
                              101
                ṁ∗ [M /yr]


                                                                    mh = 6 × 10
                              100                                           10 M


                                                                   mh = 1.4 × 10
                        10−1                                                 10 M
                                       m
                                       h   =
                                               10 9
                              −2                  M
                        10
                                               50         100          150          200
                                                       tSF [Myr]

Figure 6. Requirements for the cumulative star formation to trigger mini-quenching, expressed in
the plane of the duration of star formation (x-axis) and its rate (y-axis). We compare our model’s
results to two galaxies, MACS0417-z5BBG [12] (z = 5.2) and JADES-GS-z7-01-QU [13] (z = 7.3),
whose ṁ∗ and tmax have been estimated by [45] (stars). From our model, as black dashed lines,
we plot the star-formation rate required to mini-quench galaxies with different halo masses and tSF
values. We plot two dashed curves with halo masses that correspond to the ṁ∗ and tSF values of the
observations. These halo masses should be seen as maximum halo masses, and smaller halo masses
with these star-formation rates would also be quenched. Because ṁ∗ is a function of halo mass and
f∗ , we plot as dots the locations on the halo mass curves that correspond to f∗ = 0.01 and f∗ = 0.001.




to drive the wind – if not, the requirements for mini-quenching becomes more stringent,
requiring reasonably large star formation efficiencies. We also emphasize that we have as-
sumed isotropic accretion in this figure; below we will find that filaments can also make the
requirements much more stringent.

      The ability to reproduce the stellar masses and quenching times also depends on the
initial mass function in our model. In the bottom panels of figure 5, we show how different
IMFs change the maximum halo mass that can be quenched. When we increase the char-
acteristic turnover in the IMF to mchar = 5M⊙ , the increased feedback efficiency produces
mini-quenching in nearly the entire stellar mass range of mini-quenched galaxies (bottom
right panel), as expected from section 3.3.

     We thus find that mini-quenching in moderately-massive galaxies can be achieved rel-
atively easily. However, the timescales over which the quenching state can persist are very
long for low-mass halos, which may conflict with observations.




                                                      – 19 –
4.2   Recreating star-formation timescales in mini-quenched galaxies
The third and last observable our model must reproduce is the duration of star formation
before the onset of mini-quenching, which we have labeled tSF .
      [45] estimated tSF for two galaxies by fitting their spectral energy distributions, assum-
ing the galaxy star formation histories are well described as top-hat functions before the
quenching period. They found tSF = 30 Myr (JADES-GS-z7-01-QU, [12]) and tSF = 40
Myr (MACS0417-z5BBG, [13]), although we note that other evidence points towards being
cautious about inferring star-formation histories from quenched galaxies (e.g., [89–91]).
      Our goal is to ensure our model can produce quenching quickly enough in galaxies with
similar star-formation rate values as those observed. To do so, we return to the simplified
model of section 3, but we use it to express the minimal requirements for mini-quenching in
a different way: given a halo mass, we rearrange equation 3.12 to solve for the combination
of f⋆ and tSF values that allow for mini-quenching. We then transform the SFE into the
(observable) star formation rate, ṁ∗ , using equation 2.6. We show the results of this approach
in figure 6, with various halo masses as dashed curves. We emphasize that these curves show
the minimum star-formation rates that our model needs to have mini-quenching at those
specific tSF and mh values. Another way to phrase this is that for a given halo mass curve,
our model can create mini-quenching in halos up to that halo mass value. Mini-quenching
can occur in halos with less mass for the associated ṁ∗ and tSF values on the curve.
      To compare our results with observations, we plot the two observed galaxies as stars in
figure 6. We see that our fiducial model can cause mini-quenching in each of these galaxies
if their halo masses are below the quoted values for the curves the observations lie on. To
compare to the observations, however, we must convert these values to stellar masses. We
find that the maximum halo mass calculated for MACS0417-z5BBG and JADES-GS-z7-01-
QU match their quoted stellar mass values of f˜∗ ∼ 0.02 and 0.03, respectively. Both of these
values match model expectations [51, 77, 86] and observations [87], so we conclude that our
model can produce mini-quenching on fast enough timescales to match observations.
      The curves in figure 6 are given for a constant halo mass, but for changing ṁ∗ values.
Because the star-formation rate depends on both halo mass and f∗ (equation 2.6), movement
along these curves corresponds to changing the star formation efficiency. Therefore, to guide
the eye, we plot as dots two SFE values (f∗ = 0.01 and f∗ = 0.001). Both our example galaxies
lie between these two values, suggesting that our model can create mini-quenching in galaxies
with similar star-formation rates and tmax values as those observed, if the example galaxies
are within that range of star-formation efficiencies. We note that although f⋆ is degenerate
with the wind efficiency ϵk in terms of the feedback efficiency, its effects are probably more
subtle on this plot because the latter does not affect the star formation rate itself. However,
to a first order, ϵk still scales linearly with f∗ , and therefore if ϵk = 0.1 (rather than ϵk = 1,
as assumed here), the required f∗ values in the plot would be 10× larger.
      We conclude that, with reasonable assumptions, mini-quenching following a star for-
mation episode lasting ∼ 30 Myr is relatively easy to achieve in our model. Thus, the key
apparent challenge is understanding why the model predicts such long quenching timescales
in small galaxies.

4.3   Quenching timescales at different redshifts
We have so far focused on mini-quenching at z ∼ 6, but it has also been observed at redshifts
lower than z ∼ 6. For example, [8] observed many low-mass z ∼ 3–5 galaxies that have been
dormant for tquench ≲ 150 Myr. There should also be mini-quenching at higher redshifts, but




                                              – 20 –
                                      200
                                                                        z=3
                                      175                               z=6
                                                                        z=9
                                      150

                                      125
                      tquench [Myr]
                                      100

                                       75

                                       50

                                       25

                                       108   109   1010   1011       1012      1013
                                                     mh [M ]

Figure 7. The effects of varying redshift in our model. To display this result, we plot the quenching
timescales, tquench , as a function of the halo mass, mh . In each case, galaxies form stars for tSF = 100
Myr, at f∗ = 0.001, and with a Chabrier-like IMF. Briefly, we find that at later times, mini-quenching
lasts for longer periods than at earlier times. This finding aligns with observations that mini-quenching
lasts for tquench ≲ 50 Myr at z ∼ 6 (e.g., [14, 85]) and tquench ≲ 150 Myr at z ∼ 3 [8].


these galaxies are difficult to observe because the key observational quantity to confirm low
star-formation rates (the Hα line) has redshifted out of detectability by z ∼ 7.4 for many
instruments [14].
      Here, we explore how mini-quenching changes as a function of redshift. We must turn
to our full numerical model to test the redshift dependence because assumptions in our
simple analytic result break down at earlier times. For example, the accretion rate scales
as ṁh ∝ (1 + z)5/2 , and Compton cooling, whose rate scales as tcomp ∝ (1 + z)−4 , becomes
important at earlier times (see appendix B).
      Figure 7 shows the quenching timescales of our model at a few different redshifts. Here
the complex effects of redshift are apparent: the maximum mass of mini-quenched galaxies
changes slightly from z = 6 to z = 3, though it changes drastically from z = 6 to z = 9.
Lower redshifts produce longer quenching timescales as well. This result aligns with the
trend that at z ∼ 6, quenching timescales appear to be ≲ 40 Myr, while at z ∼ 3, these
timescales have increased to ≲ 150 Myr. While it is true that this lower-redshift sample could
be contaminated with sources that are not mini-quenched but will be completely quenched
(which can be the case even for low-mass early galaxies; see [40]), it is reassuring that the
timescale that galaxies are mini-quenched at z = 3 is longer than the mini-quenching at
z = 6.

4.4   The effects of filamentary accretion
A result of our model that should not be overlooked is that it predicts very long quenching
timescales for many halo masses (see figure 5). Observations do allow tquench ≳ 100 Myr at




                                                   – 21 –
                250      fcover = 1        f∗ = 0.001                                          f∗ = 0.01
                         fcover = 0.1
                200      fcover = 0.05
                         fcover = 0.005
tquench [Myr]




                                                                   1/
                                                                       10
                150




                                                                       th
                                                                        ini
                                                                            t.
                                                                            ga
                100




                                                                              s
                 50

                 0
                 108   109    1010  1011     1012       1013     108        109   1010  1011    1012       1013
                               mh [M ]                                             mh [M ]

Figure 8. The impact of filamentary accretion on mini-quenching. We plot these results for two
values of f∗ (left and right panels). For each halo mass, mh , we plot the quenching timescale, tquench ,
on the y-axis. We assume a Chabrier-like IMF with tSF = 100 Myr in all cases and assume z = 6. Each
colored curve represents a different covering fraction, fcover (see section 4.4). The blue curve shows the
result of our fiducial model (which implicitly assumes fcover = 1). We decrease the covering fraction
down to fcover = 0.005, which is the approximate covering fraction using the filament model from [76].
For such narrow filaments, galaxies do not undergo mini-quenching in our model (tquench = 0 across
all the halo masses). Further, we plot as dashed blue lines the result of initializing our fcover = 1
model with 10% of the gas mass as the rest of our models, also decreasing the quenching timescale.


z = 6, given that mini-quenched galaxies with longer timescales are likely more difficult to
identify, so we may eventually observe some of them. However, the apparent discrepancy at
low masses is large, so in this section, we explore how the inclusion of filaments (fcover < 1)
affects the maximum quenching timescale.
      Figure 8 shows the impact of the size of filaments on mini-quenching timescales. In
this figure, we run our model for two values of f∗ (left and right panels) and with filaments
of different sizes (parameterized by changing fcover ). Recall that the accretion rate is held
constant as we change fcover , so the primary effect of accretion is to increase the “momentum-
loading” term in the wind propagation equation. The blue curves represent the model with
isotropic accretion, or fcover = 1. When we decrease fcover , both the maximum halo mass
and the quenching timescale drop dramatically. If we assume fcover = 0.005 (green line),
as implied for all z = 6 observed galaxies by the model from [76], mini-quenching becomes
impossible. These results show the drastic effect filamentary accretion by gas has on mini-
quenching in our model.
      While filamentary accretion significantly decreases the maximum halo mass that is
quenched in our model, it also decreases the quenching timescale. If fcover = 0.1, then
the quenching timescale decreases from tquench > 100 Myr to tquench ≲ 50 Myr in many
cases. This change improves the agreement with observed systems because it increases the
importance of accreting gas on the motion of the shell, which does not decrease with radius
like gravity does.
      Interestingly, we find that in the left panel of figure 8, a lower covering fraction can
create a slightly larger quenching timescale for a range of halo masses. This effect is the




                                                        – 22 –
result of the complicated interplay between the time spent forming stars and the quenching
timescale. In a scenario with a smaller covering fraction, the galaxies spend more time
forming stars before the galaxy becomes quenched, and in this range of halo masses, these
extra stars result in longer quenched periods.
     Thus, we find that narrow filamentary accretion has a dramatic effect on mini-quenching.
Filaments as narrow as suggested by some models make it essentially impossible, because the
incoming gas has such a high ram pressure. Mini-quenching can thus only occur if accretion
at high redshifts occurs over extended filaments. That said, such filaments can decrease the
timescale of quenching at low halo masses, alleviating one of the challenges of the model.

4.5   Sensitivity to initial conditions
We also plot in figure 8 as dashed blue curves the result of a model with fcover = 1 but
initialized with 10% of the initial gas mass. Such a setup might occur if a galaxy removed
most of its gas in the previous quenching cycle. In this case, the quenching timescale decreases
drastically. Therefore, another potential solution for the large quenching timescales at low
halo masses is that these galaxies have already evacuated most of their gas in previous cycles.
But such an occurrence also serves to decrease the star-formation rates of these galaxies,
potentially causing disagreement in other observational quantities. For example, figure 6
displays the initial conditions that produce star-formation rates and tSF which agree with
observations. If we tweak the calculation so that the gas mass is 10% of what we assumed
in the figure, keeping all the other parameters constant, the required tSF becomes ∼ 2–3×
larger, disrupting the agreement with our model and the observations. Of course, we could
compensate for this problem by adjusting other model parameters, such as by increasing
the star-formation efficiency by 10× or the halo mass by ∼ 4×. These changes restore the
agreement in figure 6, although these secondary changes have cascading effects (for example,
by increasing the quenching timescales as well). Therefore, while initializing a galaxy with
less interstellar gas is a solution to our too large quenching timescales at low masses, it does
not appear to be a robust solution.

4.6   Estimating the fraction of galaxies in mini-quenched phases
So far, we have focused on mini-quenching in individual galaxies, but an interesting question
is how common these systems are. A complete census of mini-quenched galaxies across the
observed samples is currently very difficult, because of the challenges in identifying these
systems and interpreting their spectra (though see [7, 92]). On the theory side, simulations
can be used, though they fail to reproduce all the characteristics of these galaxies in, e.g.,
the shape of quenched SEDs [49, 85].
       The fraction of time a galaxy is quenched (or its duty cycle) is fquench,i ≈ tquench /(tquench +
tSF ). This quantity can be folded together with the halo mass function to find the total frac-
tion of galaxies that will be quenched at any given time:
                                   R∞
                                    log mh,min fquench,i (mh )nh (mh )d log mh
                         fquench =         R∞                                  ,                 (4.1)
                                            log mh,min Φ(mh )d log mh

where nh is the halo mass function in units of number density per logarithmic interval of mass
and mh,lim is the minimum halo mass observable by a survey. To compute this quantity, we
use the [93] halo mass function with the friends-of-friends halo-finding method [94], though
these choices will not significantly alter our results.




                                               – 23 –
                                                f∗ = 0.001
                    0.8                                                              0.8




                                                                    fquench(> m∗, tot, lim)
fquench(> mh,lim)




                    0.6                                                              0.6


                    0.4                                                              0.4


                    0.2                                                              0.2



                          109        1010       1011         1012                              107     108     109     1010      1011

                                                 f∗ = 0.01
                    0.8                                                              0.8
                                                                    fquench(> m∗,tot,lim)
fquench(> mh,lim)




                    0.6                                                              0.6


                    0.4                                                              0.4

                            fcover = 1
                    0.2     fcover = 0.1                                             0.2
                            fcover = 0.05

                          109        1010       1011         1012                              107     108     109     1010      1011
                                  mh,lim [M ]                                                 m∗,total,lim ∼ f˜∗(Ωb/Ωm)mh [M ]

Figure 9. The fraction of galaxies undergoing mini-quenching as a function of minimum observed
halo and stellar mass, assuming all galaxies above that mass threshold are observed. This fraction
is the duty cycle of the quenching phase, weighted by the halo mass function (see equation 4.1).
We show it as a function of SFE and the covering fraction of the accreting filaments. Briefly, the
quenching fractions are high in our model if accretion is isotropic, though filamentary accretion allows
for smaller fractions – filaments appear to be required at z ∼ 6 if only a small fraction of galaxies are
mini-quenched. All curves take z = 6 and assume a Chabrier-like IMF.




                                                              – 24 –
       We use our full model to estimate this fraction in figure 9 (with a Chabrier-like IMF
at z = 6). The first row assumes f∗ = 0.001, while the second row takes f∗ = 0.01. In each
panel, we show three different cases for the accretion geometry, including isotropic accretion
and filaments with different covering fractions. The second column takes the halo mass
results in the first column and converts them to an approximate total stellar-mass range,
assuming f˜∗ = [0.01, 0.1]. We find that a small fquench among low-mass galaxies only occurs
if filaments are very narrow (fcover ≪ 1).
       Direct, observational tests for filaments at high redshift are impossible at the moment,
though indirect tests might be possible. For example, our model predicts that galaxies
accreting isotropically will be mini-quenched for much longer periods than galaxies accreting
by gas filaments. Therefore, our model predicts that field galaxies may be mini-quenched for
longer periods than galaxies in the Cosmic Web, if one makes the reasonable assumption that
field galaxies accrete more isotropically than galaxies embedded in the Cosmic Web (which
accrete by filaments). Simulations could test this prediction as well, though the simulation
would have to span cosmological scales to securely estimate fquench , while still having a
sufficiently high resolution to resolve outflows. Certainly, future work is required, and within
our current capabilities.

5     Discussion

Our model is by construction quite simple. Here we consider a few well-motivated extensions
that could help explain other observable features of the interactions of winds and accretion
in mini-quenching.

5.1    Instabilities in the expanding shell
So far, we have assumed that mini-quenching continues until the feedback-driven shell stalls
and falls back. However, it is very likely that these shells are actually part of complex
multiphase media which impact the equally complex and multiphase CGM surrounding their
host galaxies, including accreting streams. The complex flows can trigger instabilities in the
wind, potentially allowing some fraction of the accreting material to penetrate the shell and
resume star formation.
      Here, we estimate the timescale over which one such instability may develop to be a
limiting factor of the duration of mini-quenching episodes. We suppose the shell and the
accreting gas experience Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities, as the low-density wind material col-
lides with the surrounding CGM inside the halo gravitational potential well. This instability
develops over a timescale τRT ≡ 2π/ω [57], where ω = [gk(δ/(2 + δ)]1/2 is the linear growth
rate of the instability and δ = 1 − ρsh /ρacc is the overdensity of the shell relative to the
accreting material. In this case, g is the gravitational acceleration at the boundary of the
two mediums and k = 2π/r is the wave number of the growing perturbation.
      With r ≈ R0 = κin rvir being the initial radius of our shell and the gravitational accel-
eration being g = 2Gmh /κrvir2 , the timescale for instabilities to grow is

                                                  −1/2                      −3/2
                           2π                 δ               κin        1+z
                   τRT   =    = 32 Myr                                                  ,   (5.1)
                           ω                 2+δ             0.07          7
where we have chosen κin to be twice the fiducial starting shell value. If the accreting
material is a few times denser than the shell (as is the case for strongly shocked material),
δ ∼ 3/4 and τRT ∼ 60 Myr. At z = 3, τRT ∼ 140 Myr. This is only a very rough estimate




                                              – 25 –
for the instability timescale (and others, such as the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, may also
be relevant). Nevertheless, it is intriguing that these instability timescales roughly match
estimates of the quenching timescales at both z ∼ 6 and z ∼ 3 (e.g., [8, 14]), suggesting that
instabilities can help limit the extremely long quenching periods predicted by our model for
small galaxies.
      If we perform a similar process as section 4.6, a ceiling of tquench = 30 Myr decreases
the quenching fraction by only ∼ 20% up until mh,lim ∼ 1011 M⊙ . At higher masses, the
average quenching timescale of galaxies is already below 30 Myr, and the quenching fraction
is unaffected. This result suggests that instabilities are an important part of mini-quenching,
and understanding the dynamics of outflows is important in connecting the incidence of
mini-quenching to theory models.

5.2    Can AGNs increase mini-quenching?
To this point, we have only considered stellar feedback, but an accretion episode could also
trigger an AGN. In this section, we consider how AGN feedback may contribute to mini-
quenching. This question is particularly interesting if the observed early galaxies accrete
through thin filaments, for which supernova winds are far less effective. To explore this
possibility, we use a simple analytic estimate similar to that of section 3. We begin by
assuming that the black hole is accreting at the Eddington luminosity, Ledd , and that a
fraction of the luminosity produced by the black hole provides feedback, ϵF . In this case, the
feedback force produced by the black hole is FBH = fcover ϵF Ledd /c.3 If the black hole is the
only source of feedback and the force of accretion is much greater than the force of gravity
(section 3.4), the galaxy is quenched if

                                                Ledd dmsh
                                    fcover ϵF       −     vvir > 0.                                  (5.2)
                                                 c    dt
The Eddington luminosity is Ledd = 4πGcmp mBH /σT ∼ 1.3 × 1046 [erg/s](mBH /108 M⊙ ),
where mp is the mass of the proton and σT is the Thomson cross section. If the halo mass of
the galaxy relates to the total stellar mass by mh = m∗,tot (Ωm /Ωb )/f˜∗ , the equation above
can be used to estimate the largest stellar mass a galaxy can have to be mini-quenched:
                                                                                3         !4
                                                                                     f˜∗
                                                              
                                          7       3               mBH /m∗,tot
                  m∗,tot,AGN ≈ 2.5 × 10       M⊙ fcover ϵ3F                                     .    (5.3)
                                                                    0.01             0.1

Here we chosen a black-hole mass to stellar mass ratio of mBH /m∗,tot = 0.01, which agrees
with observations of early black holes [33, 34, 95], but is large compared to local galaxies.
Comparison to figure 5 shows that AGNs are somewhat less efficient than stellar feedback,
which is not surprising on energetic grounds – while black hole accretion is about an order
of magnitude more efficient than stellar fusion, the black holes are still much smaller than
the host galaxies in our fiducial scaling.
     The steep scaling with fcover implies that the additional AGN feedback still would not
be enough to trigger mini-quenching if fcover ∼ 0.005, as suggested by the analytic model
of [76]. Our model therefore suggests that mini-quenched galaxies have relatively diffuse
accretion channels.
   3
    Here we have assumed that the black hole feedback is itself isotropic. In most models of AGN feedback,
winds and jets are not isotropic, but in that case they would only help with mini-quenching if the feedback
and accretion flows were aligned. We ignore this possibility for simplicity.




                                                   – 26 –
5.3   Escaping winds and metal enrichment
One of the most widely-recognized implications of stellar feedback is large-scale chemical
enrichment of the early Universe. Estimates of wind enrichment using feedback models
similar to our own – with the important exception of ignoring the accretion flows and hence
allowing continuous star formation – have shown that a substantial fraction of the IGM can
be enriched by metals in this way (e.g., [44, 75, 96, 97]). In contrast, in our model only the
smallest halos are able to liberate the gas from the halo.
      As noted, the key difference is in our treatment of accretion flows. Once mini-quenching
occurs, and the initial wave of supernovae cease, the inward momentum added by accretion
will inevitably stall the shell in all but the smallest systems. To estimate the maximum
halo mass whose wind can escape the system (in isotropic accretion), the binding energy
required to move a shell to the virial radius can be approximated as Eb = Eg + Eacc . We
have seen that gravity dominates the inward force for r ≲ 0.32rvir , and accretion dominates
outside of that radius. Thus, we can estimate the energy required as the work to overcome
the gravitational force to 0.32rvir and the work to overcome the accretion force at larger
radii. The energy pushing against the shell is at maximum the total energy from supernova,
Einput = ϵSN NSN × 1051 erg (see appendix A for an analytic calculation of NSN ). If we set
the binding energy equal to the input energy, we find the maximum halo mass that gas can
escape an isotropically-accreting galaxy is
                                                              3/2
                                            11           f∗
                               mh ≲ 1 × 10 M⊙                         ,                  (5.4)
                                                        0.01
assuming a z = 6 galaxy forming stars for tSF = 100 Myr with a Chabrier-like IMF, and
ϵSN = 1. Therefore, observed mini-quenched systems can remove gas from a galaxy, even
in the presence of an accretion force. However, if the accreting gas has the same velocity
outside the virial radius as it does inside it, the gas will eventually recycle back into the
galaxy because the accretion force will continue to push on the outflowing gas outside the
halo.
      In the case of filaments, much of the gas will not encounter an accretion force because
it is not incident on the accreting filaments. The outflowing gas will be subject only to the
gravitational force and thus have an easier time leaving the galaxy. The maximum halo mass
where the gas can escape the galaxy becomes mh ≲ 1.5 × 1011 M⊙ (f∗ /0.01)3/2 , which is not a
sizable difference. Further, this maximum halo mass resembles the values found in [75], which
used a similar wind model, albeit without including the accretion force we have highlighted
here.

5.4   Starbursts following a mini-quenching episode
We now consider another consequence of mini-quenching, relevant for any case in which the
shell gas remains bound to the system. When a galaxy is mini-quenched, feedback from the
galaxy (of any form) depletes the gas from the galaxy and prevents any further gas from
accreting for the remainder of its quenching period. Afterwards, the galaxy begins to accrete
again. But what happens to the gas that has been prevented from accreting onto the galaxy?
      In the previous section, we showed that when accretion is included, mini-quenching can
only temporarily prevent gas from falling back onto a galaxy, except at the smallest masses.
Using the galaxy growth model in section 2.2, the amount of gas that will accrete over a
quenching period, tquench , is




                                           – 27 –
                          ∆macc = mg,i (1 − exp[Atquench (1 + z)5/2 ]),                      (5.5)
where mg,i is the initial gas mass in the galaxy before mini-quenching. Thus mini-quenching
for ∼ 50 Myr will temporarily prevent a gas mass ≳ 0.2(Ωb /Ωm )mh from accreting (or larger
at z ≫ 6) – which will then fall back quickly once the mini-quenching period ends, likely
triggering another bout of rapid star formation.
      [59] found that early galaxies can form stars (at lower rates) out to ∼ 0.4rvir . While their
calculation is contextualized around star formation in a turbulent circumgalactic medium at
early times, their results might apply to this scenario as well. Stars might form in the gas
during infall, and there could be a large amount of star formation at once. However, a more
sophisticated analysis will be required to determine the outcome of this large gas mass that
will accrete post-quenching.

6    Conclusions

We have presented a model to explore how star formation can create mini-quenching in high-z
galaxies. Below, we lay out our key conclusions and their implications for mini-quenching.
      We found that our model is able to reproduce key observables in mini-quenched galaxies
with feedback from star formation. Galaxies in our model produce stellar feedback through
a combination of dust-driven winds, radiation pressure by Lyα photons, and a pressure force
created by supernova, with the last typically dominating. If these feedback forces overcome
the binding forces of gravity and accretion (included explicitly in our model for the first
time), the galaxy is quenched and the gas in the galaxy is pushed into a thin shell outside the
star-forming region. The shell is expanded by feedback but eventually falls onto the galaxy
again once star formation ceases and the feedback force fades. Using this model, we find:

    1. Adopting plausible galaxy-formation parameter values (e.g., f∗ = 0.01), supernovae
       provide enough feedback to remove gas from galaxies with similar stellar masses to
       observed mini-quenched galaxies at Cosmic Dawn – up to m∗,tot ≈ 1010 M⊙ (figure 5),
       if accretion is isotropic rather than filamentary. This mass scale is sensitive to both
       the adopted star-formation efficiency (e.g., increasing f∗ by a factor of ten increases
       the mass scale by a factor of ∼ 15) and the details of star formation (e.g., a top-heavy
       IMF can increase the threshold by up to ∼ 8×).

    2. Stellar feedback from a galaxy lasts long enough to reproduce the ≲ 50 Myr quenching
       timescales of mini-quenched galaxies at z ∼ 6 (figure 5). In fact, feedback in our model
       causes quenching for tquench ≳ 100 Myr with certain parameter choices, which is too
       long.

    3. One possibility to reduce the quenching timescale is for the galaxy to accrete by fila-
       ments (figure 8). However, this is a balancing act, as filaments must be much larger
       than expected sizes from analytic models, or else the galaxy would not be able to pre-
       vent further accretion of cold gas and mini-quench the galaxy. A second solution is to
       appeal to instabilities in the expanding shell, which could prevent galaxies from being
       quenched for longer than ∼ 30–100 Myr. Such a solution also predicts that galaxies
       cannot be mini-quenched for long periods – in agreement with current (though biased)
       observations.




                                              – 28 –
    4. Supernovae provide energy at fast enough rates to mini-quench z = 6 galaxies with
       star-formation periods equal to or less than observed values (figure 6). If the observed
       star-formation timescales are correct, our model can mini-quench galaxies with a stellar
       mass to baryon mass ratio of ∼ 0.02 – well within the range of expected and observed
       values.

    5. Our model predicts that if galaxies accrete with thin filaments, then the fraction of
       galaxies that are mini-quenched is small. If a population of galaxies accretes isotropi-
       cally (e.g., as field galaxies might), then their quenching timescales are long.

      Future observations will be key to understand mini-quenched galaxies. Currently, our
knowledge of the process is limited by the sparsity of observed systems. Upcoming surveys
will no doubt reveal galaxies at all stages of quenching, helping us statistically measure
the timescales associated with quenching, and therefore constraining the underlying galaxy
formation parameters. Further, simulations capable of resolving the complicated dynamics of
turbulent, interstellar gas at the edge of a galaxy, as well as the Cosmic Web as a whole, are
forthcoming. Such simulations will illuminate the outer reaches of a galaxy, and advance our
understanding of how outflowing gas interacts with accreting gas. In the future, we expect
such improvements in understanding mini-quenching to provide a valuable window into early
star formation.


A     Analytic calculation of the number of supernova in our model

In this section, we calculate the number of supernovae that will occur after some time t of
star formation. We assume there has been no previous star formation, so that only the stars
forming at t ≥ 0 produce supernovae. In this calculation, we assume a Chabrier-like IMF
(see section 2.4) and a galaxy at z = 6.
      First, we will assume that stars have only been forming for t < tSN , where tSN = 55
Myr (the lifetime of the smallest star to go supernova). At times longer than this, all the
supernova will have gone off for the stars formed at t = 0 Myr. This adds complexity to the
calculation, which we will expand upon later in this section.
      We can calculate the rate of supernova occurring for a population of age ∆t using
equation 2.15:

                                                                                              −0.46
                                                                          ∆t
                                                                                         t′
                                                             Z                  
                                  −2        f∗           mh                     ′
                 Ṅ (∆t) = 30 Myr                                              dt                      ,   (A.1)
                                           0.01        108 M⊙         0                 Myr

where we have assumed a constant halo mass for any given tmax (though we include a factor
to account for halo growth in equation 3.12). With this simplified equation, we compute a
scaling relation for the rate of supernovae as a function of time and other parameters:

                                                         0.54                            
                                           −1       ∆t               f∗               mh
                     Ṅ (∆t) = 56 Myr                                                             .        (A.2)
                                                    Myr             0.01            108 M⊙

The total number of supernova to come after a time t is achieved by integrating equation
A.2 such that




                                                    – 29 –
                                              55 Myr
             1.00
LSN/(LSN + |Lcomp|)



             0.95

             0.90

                                f∗ = 0.001                                                       z=3
             0.85
                                f∗ = 0.01                                                        z=6
             0.80               f∗ = 0.1                                                         z=9
                      0    20        40          60                80    100          0     20     40         60        80    100
                                     tSF [Myr]                                                         tSF [Myr]

Figure 10. Relative effect of Compton cooling compared to the luminosity from supernova in our
model. (Left panel:) The impact of Compton cooling for multiple f∗ values at z = 6. At the low
end of possible f∗ values, Compton cooling has a maximum effect of 10% after tSF = 100 Myr. The
vertical dashed line is tSN = 55 Myr (see appendix A). (Right panel:) Similar to the left panel, but at
various redshifts (and with f∗ = 0.01). At lower redshifts, Compton cooling becomes less important,
though at early times it cannot be ignored.




                                                           Z   t
                                          N (t) =         Ṅ (t − t′ )dt′                                                    (A.3)
                                                        0
                                                                1.54                
                                                              t            f∗       mh
                                                     = 36                                  .                                 (A.4)
                                                            Myr           0.01    108 M⊙

Again, this expression holds for t < tSN . If we wish to expand this calculation to t > 55 Myr,
we have to recognize that for times t − t′ > 55 Myr, all the supernovae generated by stars
forming at a time t′ have exploded already. Thus for t > 55 Myr:

                                                 Z     t
                                    N (t) =                Ṅ (t − t′ )dt′                                                   (A.5)
                                                   0
                                                                                  Z   tSN
                                          = Ṅ (tSN ) × (t − tSN ) +      Ṅ (t − t′ )dt                                     (A.6)
                                                                      0
                                                                        t − tSN
                                                                            
                                                     f∗        mh
                                          = 488                                     + 17237.                                 (A.7)
                                                   0.01     108 M⊙        Myr

And therefore the final, generalized calculation for the number of supernova having occurred
after time t is
                                                                             (
                                                                               (t/tSN )1.54 ,            if t ≤ tSN
                                                           
                                                  f∗                 mh
                          N (t) = 17237                                                                                      (A.8)
                                                 0.01              108 M⊙      (t − tSN )/tchar + 1,     if t > tSN ,

where tchar = 36 Myr is a useful characteristic timescale to define.




                                                                         – 30 –
B     Effect of Compton cooling on the pressure from hot gas

In this section, we quantify the effects of Compton cooling by running our galaxy source
model (section 2) for tSF = 100 Myr and track the luminosity output from supernova and
from Compton cooling throughout.
      In figure 10, we plot the ratio of supernova luminosity to the total luminosity impacting
the pressure force for a number of parameters (though we take the absolute value of the
luminosity of Compton cooling). In the left panel, we find that our approximation of zero
Compton cooling is correct to ∼ 10% if f∗ ≲ 0.01 and to ∼ 20% at higher values of f∗ . We
also find that the curves change slope at tSF ∼ 55 Myr, which aligns with our timescale of
tSN = 55 Myr (see appendix A). In the right panel of the figure, we plot the effect of Compton
cooling for different redshifts. We find that at z = 3 and tSF = 100 Myr, Compton cooling
provides a ∼ 1% effect on the total pressure luminosity, though at z = 9, the Compton
cooling quickly becomes important. Therefore, our approximations of zero Compton cooling
in section 3 are accurate for z ≲ 6.

Acknowledgments

We thank Sahil Hegde and Michael Wyatt for useful discussions. This work was supported
by NASA through award 80NSSC22K0818 and by the National Science Foundation through
award AST-2510939.
    This work has made extensive use of NASA’s Astrophysics Data System (http://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/)
and the arXiv e-Print service (http://arxiv.org), as well as the following software: mat-
plotlib [98], numpy [99], astropy [100], scipy [101], and colossus [78].

References
    [1] G.S. Stinson, J.J. Dalcanton, T. Quinn, T. Kaufmann and J. Wadsley, Breathing in Low-Mass
        Galaxies: A Study of Episodic Star Formation, ApJ 667 (2007) 170 [0705.4494].
    [2] E. Merlin, C. Chiosi, L. Piovan, T. Grassi, U. Buonomo and F. La Barbera, Formation and
        evolution of early-type galaxies - III. Dependence of the star formation history on the total
        mass and initial overdensity, MNRAS 427 (2012) 1530 [1204.5118].
    [3] C.-A. Faucher-Giguère, A model for the origin of bursty star formation in galaxies, MNRAS
        473 (2018) 3717 [1701.04824].
    [4] M.E. Orr, C.C. Hayward and P.F. Hopkins, A simple non-equilibrium feedback model for
        galaxy-scale star formation: delayed feedback and SFR scatter, MNRAS 486 (2019) 4724
        [1810.09460].
    [5] S.R. Furlanetto and J. Mirocha, Bursty star formation during the Cosmic Dawn driven by
        delayed stellar feedback, MNRAS 511 (2022) 3895 [2109.04488].
    [6] A. Dekel, K.C. Sarkar, Y. Birnboim, N. Mandelker and Z. Li, Efficient formation of massive
        galaxies at cosmic dawn by feedback-free starbursts, MNRAS 523 (2023) 3201 [2303.04827].
    [7] T. Yang, T. Wang, K. Xu, H. Sun, L. Zhou, L. Xie et al., A census of quiescent galaxies
        across 0.5 < z < 8 with JWST/MIRI: Mass-dependent number density evolution of quiescent
        galaxies in the early Universe, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2510.12235 [2510.12235].
    [8] E. Merlin, F. Fortuni, A. Calabró, M. Castellano, P. Santini, A. Fontana et al., Witnessing
        downsizing in the making: quiescent and breathing galaxies at the dawn of the Universe, The
        Open Journal of Astrophysics 8 (2025) E170 [2509.09764].




                                                 – 31 –
 [9] F. Valentino, G. Brammer, K.M.L. Gould, V. Kokorev, S. Fujimoto, C.K. Jespersen et al., An
     Atlas of Color-selected Quiescent Galaxies at z ¿ 3 in Public JWST Fields, ApJ 947 (2023)
     20 [2302.10936].
[10] S. Alberts, C.C. Williams, J.M. Helton, K.A. Suess, Z. Ji, I. Shivaei et al., To High Redshift
     and Low Mass: Exploring the Emergence of Quenched Galaxies and Their Environments at 3
     ¡ z ¡ 6 in the Ultra-deep JADES MIRI F770W Parallel, ApJ 975 (2024) 85 [2312.12207].
[11] D. Marchesini, G. Brammer, T. Morishita, P. Bergamini, X. Wang, M. Bradac et al., Early
     Results from GLASS-JWST. IX. First Spectroscopic Confirmation of Low-mass Quiescent
     Galaxies at z ¿ 2 with NIRISS, ApJL 942 (2023) L25 [2207.13625].
[12] V. Strait, G. Brammer, A. Muzzin, G. Desprez, Y. Asada, R. Abraham et al., An Extremely
     Compact, Low-mass Galaxy on its Way to Quiescence at z = 5.2, ApJL 949 (2023) L23
     [2303.11349].
[13] T.J. Looser, F. D’Eugenio, R. Maiolino, J. Witstok, L. Sandles, E. Curtis-Lake et al., A
     recently quenched galaxy 700 million years after the Big Bang, Nature 629 (2024) 53
     [2302.14155].
[14] A. Covelo-Paz, C. Meuwly, P.A. Oesch, C. Witten, A. Weibel, C. Carvajal-Bohorquez et al.,
     A systematic search for dormant galaxies at z ∼ 5−7 from the JWST NIRSpec archive, A&A
     705 (2026) A155 [2506.22540].
[15] T.A. Hutchison, G. Khullar, J.R. Rigby, B. Welch, M.K. Florian, K. Sharon et al., JWST &
     the Waz Arc I: Spatially Resolving the Physical Conditions within a Post-Starburst Galaxy at
     Redshift 5 with NIRSpec IFS, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2512.02000 [2512.02000].
[16] M. Messa, E. Vanzella, F. Loiacono, A. Adamo, M. Oguri, K. Sharon et al., JWST
     spectroscopic confirmation of the Cosmic Gems arc at z=9.625 – Insights into the small scale
     structure of a post-burst system, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2507.18705 [2507.18705].
[17] N.S. Martis, D. Marchesini, G.B. Brammer, A. Muzzin, I. Labbé, I.G. Momcheva et al., The
     Evolution of the Fractions of Quiescent and Star-forming Galaxies as a Function of Stellar
     Mass Since z = 3: Increasing Importance of Massive, Dusty Star-forming Galaxies in the
     Early Universe, ApJL 827 (2016) L25 [1606.04090].
[18] G. De Lucia, F. Fontanot, M. Hirschmann and L. Xie, Cosmic quenching, arXiv e-prints
     (2025) arXiv:2502.01724 [2502.01724].
[19] J. Silk and M.J. Rees, Quasars and galaxy formation, A&A 331 (1998) L1
     [astro-ph/9801013].
[20] E. Choi, J.P. Ostriker, T. Naab, L. Oser and B.P. Moster, The impact of mechanical AGN
     feedback on the formation of massive early-type galaxies, MNRAS 449 (2015) 4105
     [1403.1257].
[21] R.S. Somerville, P.F. Hopkins, T.J. Cox, B.E. Robertson and L. Hernquist, A semi-analytic
     model for the co-evolution of galaxies, black holes and active galactic nuclei, MNRAS 391
     (2008) 481 [0808.1227].
[22] M. Martig, F. Bournaud, R. Teyssier and A. Dekel, Morphological Quenching of Star
     Formation: Making Early-Type Galaxies Red, ApJ 707 (2009) 250 [0905.4669].
[23] A.C. Carnall, D.J. McLeod, R.J. McLure, J.S. Dunlop, R. Begley, F. Cullen et al., A
     surprising abundance of massive quiescent galaxies at 3 ¡ z ¡ 5 in the first data from JWST
     CEERS, MNRAS 520 (2023) 3974 [2208.00986].
[24] T.A. Russell, N. Dobric, N.J. Adams, C.J. Conselice, D. Austin, T. Harvey et al., Cosmic
     stillness: high quiescent galaxy fractions across upper mass scales in the early Universe to z =
     7 with JWST, MNRAS 544 (2025) 4482 [2412.11861].




                                              – 32 –
[25] A.C. Carnall, R.J. McLure, J.S. Dunlop, D.J. McLeod, V. Wild, F. Cullen et al., A massive
     quiescent galaxy at redshift 4.658, Nature 619 (2023) 716 [2301.11413].
[26] W.M. Baker, S. Lim, F. D’Eugenio, R. Maiolino, Z. Ji, S. Arribas et al., The abundance and
     nature of high-redshift quiescent galaxies from JADES spectroscopy and the FLAMINGO
     simulations, MNRAS 539 (2025) 557 [2410.14773].
[27] S.D. Stevenson, A.C. Carnall, H.-H. Leung, E. Taylor, F. Cullen, J.S. Dunlop et al., PRIMER
     & JADES reveal an abundance of massive quiescent galaxies at 2 ¡ z ¡ 5, MNRAS (2025)
     [2509.06913].
[28] Y. Zhu, E. Egami, X. Fan, F. Sun, G.D. Becker, C. Cain et al., Quasar Radiative Feedback
     May Suppress Galaxy Growth on Intergalactic Scales at z = 6.3, ApJL 995 (2025) L5
     [2509.00153].
[29] S. Hegde, M.M. Wyatt and S.R. Furlanetto, A hidden population of active galactic nuclei can
     explain the overabundance of luminous z ¿ 10 objects observed by JWST, JCAP 2024 (2024)
     025 [2405.01629].
[30] A. Feltre, S. Charlot and J. Gutkin, Nuclear activity versus star formation: emission-line
     diagnostics at ultraviolet and optical wavelengths, MNRAS 456 (2016) 3354 [1511.08217].
[31] J. Gutkin, S. Charlot and G. Bruzual, Modelling the nebular emission from primeval to
     present-day star-forming galaxies, MNRAS 462 (2016) 1757 [1607.06086].
[32] R.L. Sanders, A.E. Shapley, M.W. Topping, N.A. Reddy and G.B. Brammer, Excitation and
     Ionization Properties of Star-forming Galaxies at z = 2.0-9.3 with JWST/NIRSpec, ApJ 955
     (2023) 54 [2301.06696].
[33] Y. Harikane, Y. Zhang, K. Nakajima, M. Ouchi, Y. Isobe, Y. Ono et al., A JWST/NIRSpec
     First Census of Broad-line AGNs at z = 4-7: Detection of 10 Faint AGNs with M BH 106 -108
     M ⊙ and Their Host Galaxy Properties, ApJ 959 (2023) 39 [2303.11946].
[34] I. Juodžbalis, R. Maiolino, W.M. Baker, E.C. Lake, J. Scholtz, F. D’Eugenio et al., JADES:
     comprehensive census of broad-line AGN from Reionization to Cosmic Noon revealed by
     JWST, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2504.03551 [2504.03551].
[35] I.K. Baldry, M.L. Balogh, R. Bower, K. Glazebrook and R.C. Nichol, Color bimodality:
     Implications for galaxy evolution, in The New Cosmology: Conference on Strings and
     Cosmology, R.E. Allen, D.V. Nanopoulos and C.N. Pope, eds., vol. 743 of American Institute
     of Physics Conference Series, pp. 106–119, AIP, Dec., 2004, DOI [astro-ph/0410603].
[36] M.L. Balogh, D.G. Gilbank, A. Muzzin, G. Rudnick, M.C. Cooper, C. Lidman et al., Gemini
     Observations of Galaxies in Rich Early Environments (GOGREEN) I: survey description,
     MNRAS 470 (2017) 4168 [1705.01606].
[37] N. Binh, A.S. Long, J. Antwi-Danso, D.C. Andrews, G. Toni, J.B. Champagne et al., Sparse
     by the River: Diverse Environments of z ¿ 3 Massive Quiescent Galaxies, arXiv e-prints
     (2025) arXiv:2512.14881 [2512.14881].
[38] G. De Lucia, L. Xie, M. Hirschmann and F. Fontanot, Where Giants Dwell: Probing the
     Environments of Early Massive Quiescent Galaxies, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2511.08674
     [2511.08674].
[39] A. Singh, L. Guaita, P. Hibon, B. Häußler, K.-S. Lee, V. Ramakrishnan et al., Quenching of
     galaxies at cosmic noon: Understanding the effect of the environment, A&A 700 (2025) A68
     [2411.12722].
[40] W.M. Baker, K. Ito, F. Valentino, P. Zhu, G. Scarpe, R. Gottumukkala et al., Double Trouble:
     Two spectroscopically confirmed low-mass quiescent galaxies at z¿5 in overdensities, arXiv
     e-prints (2025) arXiv:2509.09761 [2509.09761].




                                             – 33 –
[41] C. Witten, P.A. Oesch, W. McClymont, R.A. Meyer, Y. Fudamoto, D. Sijacki et al., Before
     its time: a remarkably evolved protocluster core at z=7.88, arXiv e-prints (2025)
     arXiv:2507.06284 [2507.06284].
[42] R. Davé, K. Finlator and B.D. Oppenheimer, An analytic model for the evolution of the
     stellar, gas and metal content of galaxies, MNRAS 421 (2012) 98 [1108.0426].
[43] A. Dekel, A. Zolotov, D. Tweed, M. Cacciato, D. Ceverino and J.R. Primack, Toy models for
     galaxy formation versus simulations, MNRAS 435 (2013) 999 [1303.3009].
[44] N. Yamaguchi, S.R. Furlanetto and A.C. Trapp, The extent of intergalactic metal enrichment
     from galactic winds during the Cosmic Dawn, MNRAS 520 (2023) 2922 [2209.09345].
[45] V. Gelli, S. Salvadori, A. Ferrara and A. Pallottini, Can Supernovae Quench Star Formation
     in High-z Galaxies?, ApJ 964 (2024) 76 [2310.03065].
[46] W. McClymont, S. Tacchella, A. Smith, R. Kannan, E. Puchwein, J. Borrow et al., The
     THESAN-ZOOM project: burst, quench, repeat – unveiling the evolution of high-redshift
     galaxies along the star-forming main sequence, MNRAS 544 (2025) 513 [2503.00106].
[47] H. Katz, M.P. Rey, C. Cadiou, O. Agertz, J. Blaizot, A.J. Cameron et al., MEGATRON:
     Reproducing the Diversity of High-Redshift Galaxy Spectra with Cosmological Radiation
     Hydrodynamics Simulations, arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2510.05201 [2510.05201].
[48] V. Gelli, S. Salvadori, A. Pallottini and A. Ferrara, The stellar populations of high-redshift
     dwarf galaxies, MNRAS 498 (2020) 4134 [2009.03912].
[49] T. Dome, S. Tacchella, A. Fialkov, D. Ceverino, A. Dekel, O. Ginzburg et al., Mini-quenching
     of z = 4-8 galaxies by bursty star formation, MNRAS 527 (2024) 2139 [2305.07066].
[50] Planck Collaboration, N. Aghanim, Y. Akrami, M. Ashdown, J. Aumont, C. Baccigalupi
     et al., Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters, A&A 641 (2020) A6 [1807.06209].
[51] S.R. Furlanetto, J. Mirocha, R.H. Mebane and G. Sun, A minimalist feedback-regulated model
     for galaxy formation during the epoch of reionization, MNRAS 472 (2017) 1576 [1611.01169].
[52] A. Dekel, Y. Birnboim, G. Engel, J. Freundlich, T. Goerdt, M. Mumcuoglu et al., Cold
     streams in early massive hot haloes as the main mode of galaxy formation, Nature 457 (2009)
     451 [0808.0553].
[53] T. Goerdt and D. Ceverino, Inflow velocities of cold flows streaming into massive galaxies at
     high redshifts, MNRAS 450 (2015) 3359 [1501.06913].
[54] J.F. Navarro, C.S. Frenk and S.D.M. White, The Structure of Cold Dark Matter Halos, ApJ
     462 (1996) 563 [astro-ph/9508025].
[55] D.M. Salim, C. Federrath and L.J. Kewley, A Universal, Turbulence-regulated Star Formation
     Law: From Milky Way Clouds to High-redshift Disk and Starburst Galaxies, ApJL 806 (2015)
     L36 [1505.03144].
[56] M.R. Krumholz, B. Burkhart, J.C. Forbes and R.M. Crocker, A unified model for galactic
     discs: star formation, turbulence driving, and mass transport, MNRAS 477 (2018) 2716
     [1706.00106].
[57] H. Mo, F.C. van den Bosch and S. White, Galaxy Formation and Evolution (2010),
     10.1017/CBO9780511807244.
[58] A.L. Danhaive, S. Tacchella, H. Übler, A. de Graaff, E. Egami, B.D. Johnson et al., The dawn
     of discs: unveiling the turbulent ionized gas kinematics of the galaxy population at z ∼ 4–6
     with JWST/NIRCam grism spectroscopy, MNRAS 543 (2025) 3249 [2503.21863].
[59] G. Sun, C.-A. Faucher-Giguère and J. Stern, A Turbulent Framework for Star Formation in
     High-redshift Galaxies, ApJ 996 (2026) 139 [2508.04768].




                                               – 34 –
[60] S.C.O. Glover and R.S. Klessen, The first stars, in Encyclopedia of Astrophysics, Volume 2,
     vol. 2, pp. 211–229, Jan., 2026, DOI [2509.14799].
[61] A. Lazar and V. Bromm, Probing the initial mass function of the first stars with transients,
     MNRAS 511 (2022) 2505 [2110.11956].
[62] J.H. Wise, M.J. Turk, M.L. Norman and T. Abel, The Birth of a Galaxy: Primordial Metal
     Enrichment and Stellar Populations, ApJ 745 (2012) 50 [1011.2632].
[63] M. Jeon, V. Bromm, A.H. Pawlik and M. Milosavljević, The first galaxies: simulating their
     feedback-regulated assembly, MNRAS 452 (2015) 1152 [1501.01002].
[64] G. Chabrier, Galactic Stellar and Substellar Initial Mass Function, PASP 115 (2003) 763
     [astro-ph/0304382].
[65] D. Schaerer, On the properties of massive Population III stars and metal-free stellar
     populations, A&A 382 (2002) 28 [astro-ph/0110697].
[66] R.S. Klessen and S.C.O. Glover, The First Stars: Formation, Properties, and Impact,
     ARA&A 61 (2023) 65 [2303.12500].
[67] T.A. Thompson and T.M. Heckman, Theory and Observation of Winds from Star-Forming
     Galaxies, ARA&A 62 (2024) 529 [2406.08561].
[68] Z. Eker, V. Bakıs, , S. Bilir, F. Soydugan, I. Steer, E. Soydugan et al., Interrelated
     main-sequence mass-luminosity, mass-radius, and mass-effective temperature relations,
     MNRAS 479 (2018) 5491 [1807.02568].
[69] D. Narayanan, P. Torrey, D. Stark, J. Chisholm, S. Finkelstein, A. Garcia et al., The Growth
     of Dust in Galaxies in the First Billion Years with Applications to Blue Monsters, arXiv
     e-prints (2025) arXiv:2509.18266 [2509.18266].
[70] C. Leitherer, D. Schaerer, J.D. Goldader, R.M.G. Delgado, C. Robert, D.F. Kune et al.,
     Starburst99: Synthesis Models for Galaxies with Active Star Formation, ApJS 123 (1999) 3
     [astro-ph/9902334].
[71] T.A. Thompson, A.C. Fabian, E. Quataert and N. Murray, Dynamics of dusty
     radiation-pressure-driven shells and clouds: fast outflows from galaxies, star clusters, massive
     stars, and AGN, MNRAS 449 (2015) 147 [1406.5206].
[72] O. Nebrin, A. Smith, K. Lorinc, J. Hörnquist, Å. Larson, G. Mellema et al., Lyman-α
     feedback prevails at Cosmic Dawn: implications for the first galaxies, stars, and star clusters,
     MNRAS 537 (2025) 1646 [2409.19288].
[73] K.M. Schure, D. Kosenko, J.S. Kaastra, R. Keppens and J. Vink, A new radiative cooling
     curve based on an up-to-date plasma emission code, A&A 508 (2009) 751 [0909.5204].
[74] M. Tegmark, J. Silk and A. Evrard, Late Reionization by Supernova-driven Winds, ApJ 417
     (1993) 54 [astro-ph/9306021].
[75] S.R. Furlanetto and A. Loeb, Metal Absorption Lines as Probes of the Intergalactic Medium
     Prior to the Reionization Epoch, ApJ 588 (2003) 18 [astro-ph/0211496].
[76] N. Mandelker, P.G. van Dokkum, J.P. Brodie, F.C. van den Bosch and D. Ceverino, Cold
     Filamentary Accretion and the Formation of Metal-poor Globular Clusters and Halo Stars,
     ApJ 861 (2018) 148 [1711.09108].
[77] B. Diemer and A.V. Kravtsov, A Universal Model for Halo Concentrations, ApJ 799 (2015)
     108 [1407.4730].
[78] B. Diemer, COLOSSUS: A Python Toolkit for Cosmology, Large-scale Structure, and Dark
     Matter Halos, ApJS 239 (2018) 35 [1712.04512].




                                              – 35 –
[79] F. van de Voort, J. Schaye, C.M. Booth, M.R. Haas and C. Dalla Vecchia, The rates and
     modes of gas accretion on to galaxies and their gaseous haloes, MNRAS 414 (2011) 2458
     [1011.2491].
[80] M. Ramsøy, A. Slyz, J. Devriendt, C. Laigle and Y. Dubois, Rivers of gas - I. Unveiling the
     properties of high redshift filaments, MNRAS 502 (2021) 351 [2101.00844].
[81] M. Danovich, A. Dekel, O. Hahn and R. Teyssier, Coplanar streams, pancakes and
     angular-momentum exchange in high-z disc galaxies, MNRAS 422 (2012) 1732 [1110.6209].
[82] A. Ferrara, D. Manzoni and E. Ntormousi, Is feedback-free star formation possible?, The Open
     Journal of Astrophysics 8 (2025) 140 [2509.02566].
[83] D. Manzoni and A. Ferrara, Lyman-α radiation pressure regulates star formation efficiency,
     arXiv e-prints (2025) arXiv:2510.25950 [2510.25950].
[84] Y. Nakazato and A. Ferrara, Radiation-driven dusty outflows from early galaxies, MNRAS
     544 (2025) 4390 [2412.07598].
[85] V. Gelli, S. Salvadori, A. Ferrara, A. Pallottini and S. Carniani, Quiescent Low-mass Galaxies
     Observed by JWST in the Epoch of Reionization, ApJL 954 (2023) L11 [2303.13574].
[86] F. Prada, P. Behroozi, T. Ishiyama, E. Pérez, A. Klypin, X. Wang et al., Galaxies at z ¿ 10:
     ΛCDM predicts increased Star Formation Efficiency, arXiv e-prints (2026) arXiv:2604.18683
     [2604.18683].
[87] S.L. Finkelstein, M. Song, P. Behroozi, R.S. Somerville, C. Papovich, M. Milosavljević et al.,
     An Increasing Stellar Baryon Fraction in Bright Galaxies at High Redshift, ApJ 814 (2015)
     95 [1504.00005].
[88] A.C. Carnall, R.J. McLure, J.S. Dunlop and R. Davé, Inferring the star formation histories of
     massive quiescent galaxies with BAGPIPES: evidence for multiple quenching mechanisms,
     MNRAS 480 (2018) 4379 [1712.04452].
[89] K.A. Suess, J. Leja, B.D. Johnson, R. Bezanson, J.E. Greene, M. Kriek et al., Recovering the
     Star Formation Histories of Recently Quenched Galaxies: The Impact of Model and Prior
     Choices, ApJ 935 (2022) 146 [2207.02883].
[90] P. Haskell, S. Das, D.J.B. Smith, R.K. Cochrane, C.C. Hayward and D. Anglés-Alcázar,
     Beware the recent past: a bias in spectral energy distribution modelling due to bursty star
     formation, MNRAS 530 (2024) L7 [2310.16097].
[91] D. Narayanan, S. Lower, P. Torrey, G. Brammer, W. Cui, R. Davé et al., Outshining by
     Recent Star Formation Prevents the Accurate Measurement of High-z Galaxy Stellar Masses,
     ApJ 961 (2024) 73 [2306.10118].
[92] G. Khullar, R. Bezanson, K.A. Suess, I. Mitsuhashi, D.J. Setton, J. Leja et al., Caught
     Napping by JWST UNCOVER+MegaScience: Constraining bursty star formation histories
     and number densities of mini-quenched galaxies at redshifts 4-7, arXiv e-prints (2026)
     arXiv:2608.30011 [2608.30011].
[93] W.A. Watson, I.T. Iliev, A. D’Aloisio, A. Knebe, P.R. Shapiro and G. Yepes, The halo mass
     function through the cosmic ages, MNRAS 433 (2013) 1230 [1212.0095].
[94] M. Davis, G. Efstathiou, C.S. Frenk and S.D.M. White, The evolution of large-scale structure
     in a universe dominated by cold dark matter, ApJ 292 (1985) 371.
[95] F. Pacucci, B. Nguyen, S. Carniani, R. Maiolino and X. Fan, JWST CEERS and JADES
     Active Galaxies at z = 4-7 Violate the Local M -M ⋆ Relation at ¿3σ: Implications for
     Low-mass Black Holes and Seeding Models, ApJL 957 (2023) L3 [2308.12331].
[96] A. Ferrara, M. Pettini and Y. Shchekinov, Mixing metals in the early Universe, MNRAS 319
     (2000) 539 [astro-ph/0004349].




                                              – 36 –
 [97] P. Madau, A. Ferrara and M.J. Rees, Early Metal Enrichment of the Intergalactic Medium by
      Pregalactic Outflows, ApJ 555 (2001) 92 [astro-ph/0010158].
 [98] J.D. Hunter, Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment, Computing in Science & Engineering 9
      (2007) 90.
 [99] S. van der Walt, S.C. Colbert and G. Varoquaux, The NumPy Array: A Structure for Efficient
      Numerical Computation, Computing in Science and Engineering 13 (2011) 22 [1102.1523].
[100] Astropy Collaboration, T.P. Robitaille, E.J. Tollerud, P. Greenfield, M. Droettboom, E. Bray
      et al., Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy, A&A 558 (2013) A33
      [1307.6212].
[101] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T.E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau et al.,
      SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python, Nat Methods 17
      (2020) 261.




                                             – 37 –
